 2020 FNF Earnings Call Summary

Fidelity National Information Services (FNF) reported record adjusted pre-tax title earnings of $528 million in the third quarter of 2020, a 30% increase over the same period in 2019. The company's adjusted pre-tax title margin was 21.2%, a 260 basis point increase over the prior year quarter. FNF's sales engine is firing on all cylinders, consistently generating and managing stable net investment spread and earnings, and the company is confident in its investment portfolio and capital position.

The company's acquisition of FGL Holdings has been successful, with F&G producing excellent sales results in the quarter while maintaining pricing discipline. F&G's recent entrance into the bank and broker-dealer channel has surpassed expectations, and the company continues to see strong momentum into the fourth quarter. F&G's investment portfolio continues to perform well in the current environment.

In the third quarter, FNF generated $3 billion in total revenue, with the Title segment producing approximately $2.5 billion, F&G producing $442 million, and the Corporate segment generating $50 million. Third quarter net earnings were $378 million, which include net recognized gains of $73 million versus net recognized gains of $4 million in the third quarter of 2019, primarily due to mark-to-market accounting treatment of equity and preferred stock securities.

The company's title claims paid of $50 million were $27 million lower than its provision of $77 million for the quarter. The carried title reserve for claim losses is currently $55 million or 3.7% above the external actuary central estimate. FNF ended the quarter with just under $1 billion in cash and short-term liquid investments at the holding company level.

Overall, FNF's financial results were robust, and the company made strong gains advancing its technology initiatives, which are focused on improving the security, transparency, and overall closing experience for FNF's customers. The company's unmatched national footprint and strong local market relationships provide it with a significant competitive advantage that it can further leverage with technology.