 2021 Q1 Earnings Call Summary

HII reported $2.3 billion in sales for the quarter, a slight increase from 2020. Diluted earnings per share were $3.68 and pension-adjusted earnings per share were $3.56, up from $2.43 in 2020. The company had a record backlog of approximately $49 billion, of which approximately $25 billion is funded.

HII completed the sale of its oil and gas business and the contribution of the San Diego Shipyard to Titan Acquisition Holdings. This transaction sharpened the focus of the Technical Solutions business into areas where the company believes its unique capabilities and close customer relationships will drive strong organic revenue growth and margin expansion.

The company had a solid quarter, making consistent progress across its shipbuilding and Technical Solutions programs. Ingalls was awarded a life-cycle engineering and support services contract for the LPD program with a cumulative value of approximately $214 million. The team remains focused on preparations for the launch of DDG 125.

Newport News revenues increased to $1.4 billion, driven by higher revenues in both aircraft carrier and submarine construction as well as fleet support services. Technical Solutions revenues decreased 18.3% due to divestitures of both the oil and gas business and the San Diego shipyard.

HII expects to finish the year with a strict building operating margin in the 7% to 8% range, with the significant remaining risk retirement events weighted toward the end of the year. The company expects shipbuilding margin for the first half of 2021 to be around the midpoint of its annual guidance range.

The company's net earnings in the quarter were $148 million, diluted earnings per share were $3.68, and excluding the impact of pension, diluted earnings per share were $3.56. The company's cash from operations was $43 million, net capital expenditures were $59 million, and free cash flow was negative $16 million. The company paid dividends of $1.14 per share or $46 million.

HII continues to view the return of excess free cash flow via share repurch