 2020 Earnings Summary

The company ended the year with a record of more than $1.5 billion of premium in force. However, the industry and markets served had a record-setting frequency of weather events during the 2020 winter season, which impacted the company's 4th quarter and full year results. The company was impacted by Hurricane Sally, PCS, Zeta, and Eta in 2020 and had minimal exposure to the Midwest Derecho. The company had a bit over 10,000 claims in the fourth quarter from named 2020 storms and other PCS events, but had no exposure to hurricane Laura or any other weather in Texas or Louisiana, including the recent winter storms. Despite the weather in 2020, the company continued its focus on underwriting, increasing its primary rates in Florida, close to 20% for the full year, including 7% in the 4th quarter for 2020 reinsurance costs, as well as increases in some of its other states. The company also continued to implement new binding guidelines to address emerging loss trends, maintain a resilient balance sheet, and enhance its reserves. The company continued to be backed by its great reinsurance program and partners with close to 75% of its first event reinsurance capacity for June 1, 2021 secured already. The company continued its geographic expansion efforts in 2020 and implemented its catastrophe rapid response teams during the COVID-19 pandemic, which accelerated its use of digital technology for adjusting claims. The company also continued to develop adaptive adjusting approaches to address claims loss cost trends.

The company ended 2020 with total revenue up 14.2% to $1.1 billion, driven primarily by growth in net premiums earned, realized gains on investments, and increases in service revenue, partially offset by decreases in net investment income and increased reinsurance costs. The company generated earnings per share of $0.60 on a GAAP basis and a loss of $0.90 on a non-GAAP adjusted basis. These results were impacted predominantly by weather events in 2020 and related social dynamics and increased reinsurance costs. The company's