Joining in the Q&A after Bob and Mike's comments will be Jacob Thaysen, President of Agilent's Life Science and Applied Markets Group; Sam Raha, President of Agilent's Diagnostics and Genomics Group; and Padraig McDonnell, President of the Agilent CrossLab Group.
You will find the most directly comparable GAAP financial metrics and reconciliations on our website.
Core revenue growth excludes the impact of currency and the acquisitions and divestitures completed within the past 12 months.
Before I get into the detail -- into the quarterly details, I want to start by recognize our Agilent India team.
Despite the challenging COVID-19 situation, our India team is working closely with our cause of do while we can to help in this time of extreme need.
In addition our Agilent India customer support, finance and IT teams have worked tiredlessly to help us close out the second quarter and keep us moving forward.
I could not be more proud of how the team has worked together in true one Agilent fashion.
Our thoughts go out the entire Agilent India team and their families during this difficult time.
In Q2 the strong momentum in our business continues against the backdrop of a recovering market.
The Agilent team delivered another outstanding quarter exceeding our expectations, both revenue and earnings are up sharply versus a solid Q2 last year when revenue and earnings per share were relatively flat.
Our growth is broad-based across all business groups, markets and geographies.
We are also expanding margins driving faster earnings-per-share growth.
Revenues for the quarter are $1.525 billion.
This is up 23% on a reported basis and up 19% core.
COVID-19 related revenues accounted for roughly 2% of overall revenues as expected and contributes about 1 point to our overall growth.
Our revenue growth is not a one quarter or easy compare story, but one that sustained above market growth.
For example, our Q2 revenues are up more than 17% core from two years ago.
Q2 operating margin of 23.9%.
This is up 150 basis points.
EPS of $0.97 is up 37% year-over-year.
Like our recent acquisitions in Cell Analysis, Resolution Bioscience an example of our build and buy growth strategy in action.
The Agilent story remains the same.
It is a story of one team outpacing the market to deliver strong broad-based growth in an environment of continuing market recovery.
Moving onto our end market highlights, we do strongly in all markets.
Our growth is led by 29% growth in pharma and 22% in food.
We are seeing improving growth in the chemical and energy market with 14% growth.
We also posted low-teens growth in diagnostics and over 20% growth in academia and government.
Lastly, environmental forensics grew 8%.
Bob will provide end market detail later in his comments.
Geographically, the Americas led the way with 27% growth.
Strength in China, Europe and the Rest of Asia continues with all growing in the mid-teens.
The 30% growth in China is on top of 4% growth last year when the business started to recover from the pandemic.
As we look at our performance by business group, the Life Sciences Applied Markets Group generated revenues of $674 million during the quarter.
LSAG is up 28% on reported basis and up 25% core off a 7% decline last year.
LSAG's growth is broad-based across all end markets and geographies.
Our focus in investments in fast growing end markets continues to pay off.
The LSAG Pharma business is very strong, growing 41% with strength in both biopharma and small molecule.
From a product perspective, we saw strength in liquid chromatography and LCMS along with continued growth in Cell Analysis.
During the quarter, Cell Analysis grew 34% with our BioTek business growing close to 40%.
During the quarter the LSAG team also contribute to our long-term companywide focus on sustainability in advance and important ESG initiatives.
LSAG announced several new products that have earned the highly respected accountability, consistency and transparency, ACT label f...
...its during the quarter.
Now turning to the rest of the P&L.
Second quarter gross margin was 55.4% flat year-on-year, despite a headwind of more than 30 basis points from currency.
Our operating margin for the second quarter came in at 23.9%, driven by volume, this is up a solid 150 basis points from last year, even as we saw increased spending as activity ramped and we invest in the future.
Strong top line growth coupled with our operating leverage helped deliver earnings per share of $0.97, up 37% versus last year.
Our tax rate was 14.75% and our share count was 307 million shares.
Now on to cash flow and the balance sheet.
Our performance translated into very strong cash flows.
We delivered $472 million in operating cash flow during the quarter, up more than 50% from last year.
The strong cash flow has continued to help drive our balanced capital deployment strategy.
During the quarter we returned $254 million to our shareholders, paying out $59 million in dividends and repurchasing 1.55 million shares for $195 million.
And as Mike mentioned, we also continue to strategically invest in the business, We spent a net of $547 million to purchase Resolution Bioscience and invested $31 million in capital expenditures.
Year-to-date, we returned $657 million to shareholders in the form of dividends and share repurchases, while reinvesting in the business by spending $619 million on M&A and capital expenditures.
And we ended the quarter with a strong balance sheet, which enables us to enjoy financial flexibility going forward.
During the quarter, we raised $850 million in long-term debt at very favorable terms, redeemed $300 million that was maturing next year and reduced our ongoing interest expense.
We ended the quarter with $1.4 billion in cash, $2.9 billion in outstanding debt and a net leverage ratio of 1 time.
Now turning to the outlook for the full year and the third quarter.
We see a great opportunity to build on our strong first half results.
Looking forward, while the pandemic is still with us, we continue to see recovery in our end markets and have solid momentum in all of our businesses.
As a result, we are again increasing our full year projections for both revenue and earnings per share.
This reflects our strong Q2 results an increasing expectations for the second half of the year.
We are also incorporating the Resolution Bioscience into our guidance.
For revenue, we are increasing our full-year range to a range of $6.15 billion to $6.21 billion, up nearly $320 million at the midpoint and representing reported growth of 15% to 16% and core growth of 12% to 13%.
Included is roughly 3 points of currency and 0.5 point attributable to M&A.
This increased outlook also reflects continued growth in our end markets.
We see sustained momentum in the second half of the year in pharma, food and environmental and forensic markets.
End markets that we expect to continue to recover in the second half include the Diagnostics and Clinical, academia and government and C&E.
As Mike mentioned during our Investor Event in December, we provided a long-range plan of annual margin expansion in the range of 50 to 100 basis points.
Our updated guidance for the year exceeds the top end of that range.
And in addition, we are increasing our fiscal 2021 non-GAAP earnings per share to a range of $4.09 to $4.14 per share.
This is growth of 25% to 26% for the year.
Now for the third fiscal quarter, we're expecting revenue to range from $1.51 billion to $1.54 billion, representing reported growth of 20% to 22% and core growth of 15% to 17.5%.
And we expect third quarter non-GAAP earnings per share to be in the range of $0.97 to $0.99 per share with growth of 24% to 27%.
We believe our strategies and our execution of driving the strong results we've achieved and put us in a great position to continue to drive strong results for the remainder of the year.
With that Ruben back to you for Q&A.
Gabriel, if you could please provide instructions for the Q&A.
