Joining in the Q&A after Bob's comments will be Jacob Thaysen, President of Agilent's Life Science and Applied Markets Group; Sam Raha, President of Agilent's Diagnostics and Genomics Group; and Padraig McDonnell, President of Agilent CrossLab Group.
You will find the most directly comparable GAAP financial metrics and reconciliations on our website.
Core revenue growth excludes the impact of currency and the acquisitions and divestitures completed within the past 12 months.
Also as announced, we will hold our virtual Investor Day in a few weeks on December 9th.
We look forward to having you join us on December 9th.
Today, I want to get straight to our quarterly results, because they tell a very compelling story.
The Agilent team delivered a very strong close to 2020.
We posted revenues of $1.48 billion during the quarter.
Revenues are up 8% on a reported basis and up 6% core.
Operating margins are a healthy 24.9%.
EPS of $0.98 is up 10% year-over-year.
These numbers tell the story of a strong resilient company that is built for continued growth.
Our better-than-expected results are due to the strength of our core business, along with signs of recovery in our end-markets.
Geographically, China continues to lead the way with double-digit growth.
From an end-market view, both our pharmaceutical and food businesses grew double-digits.
In addition, our chemical and energy business grew after two quarters of declines, exceeding our expectations.
We also saw a rebound in U.S. sales during the quarter.
Overall, COVID-19 tailwinds contributed just over 2 points of core growth.
Achieving these results in the face of a global pandemic is a tribute to our team and the company we've built over the last five years.
I couldn't be more pleased with the way the Agilent team has performed over the last quarter and throughout 2020.
We have again proven our ability to work together and step up to meet any challenge that comes our way.
During the quarter, all three of our business groups grew high-single digits on a reported basis.
Our Life Sciences and Applied Markets Group generated $671 million in revenue, up 8% on a reported basis and up 4% core.
LSAG growth is broad based.
The cell analysis and mass spec businesses both grew at double-digit rates.
In terms of end markets, chemical and energy returned to growth, food grew double-digits and pharma high-single digits.
LSAG remains extremely well positioned and is outperforming the market.
The Agilent CrossLab Group came in with revenues at $518 million.
This is up a reported 9% and up 7% core.
ACG's growth is also broad based across end-markets and geographies.
Our focus on on-demand service is paying off as activity on our customer labs continues to increase.
The ACG team continues to build on its already deep connections with our customers, helping them operate through the pandemic and continue to drive improved efficiencies in lab operations.
For the Diagnostics and Genomics Group, revenues were $294 million, up 9% reported and up 7% core.
Growth was broad based, with NASD oligo manufacturing revenues up roughly 40%.
The genomics and pathology businesses continued to improve during the quarter.
I'm also very proud of our NASD team for successfully ramping production at our new Frederick site this year.
We have built a very strong position in this attractive market with excellent long-term prospects for high growth.
Let's now shift gears and look at our full-year fiscal 2020 results.
Despite the disruption, uncertainty and economic turmoil of dealing with the global pandemic, the Agilent team delivered solid results.
We generated $5.34 billion in revenue, up 3% on a reported basis and up nearly 1% core.
To put this in perspective, it's helpful to recall the progression of our growth.
In Q1, we delivered 2% core growth, as you saw the first impact of COVID-19 in our business in China.
Both Q2 and Q3 declined low-single digits as the pandemic spread across the globe and governments instituted b...
...to benefit us in the coming year.
The quarter also capped off in full-year operating margin of 23.5%, an increase of 20 basis points over fiscal 2019.
Now wrapping up the income statement, our non-GAAP earnings per share for the quarter came in at $0.98, up 10% versus last year.
Our full-year earnings per share of $3.28 increased 5%.
In addition, our operating cash flow continues to be strong.
In Q4, we had operating cash flow of $377 million, up more than $60 million over last year.
And in Q4, we continued our balanced capital approach, repurchasing 2.48 million shares for $250 million.
For the year, we repurchased just over 5.2 million shares for $469 million and ended the fiscal year in a strong financial position with $1.4 billion in cash and just under $2.4 billion in debt.
All in all, a very good end to the year.
Now let's move on to our outlook for the 2021 fiscal year.
We and our customers have been dealing with COVID-19 for nearly a full year and are seeing our end-markets recover.
Visibility into the business cadence is improving.
And as a result, we are initiating guidance for 2021.
There is still a greater than usual level of uncertainty in the marketplace across most regions, and so while we're providing guidance, we're doing so with a wider range than we have provided historically.
It is with this perspective that we're taking a positive but prudent view of Q1 in the coming year.
For the full year, we're expecting revenue to range between $5.6 billion and $5.7 billion, representing reported growth of 5% to 7% and core growth of 4% to 6%.
This range takes into account the steady macro-environment we're seeing.
It does not contemplate any business disruptions caused by extended shut downs like we saw in the first half of this year.
In addition, we're expecting all three of our businesses to grow, led by DGG.
We expect DGG to grow high-single digits, with the continued contribution of NASD ramp and the recovery in cancer diagnostics.
We believe ACG will return to its historical high-single-digit growth, while LSAG is expected to grow low-to-mid single digits.
We expect operating margin expansion of 50 basis points to 70 basis points for the year, as we absorb the build out costs of the second line in our Frederick, Colorado NASD site.
And then helping you build out your models, we're planning for a tax rate of 14.75%, which is based on current tax policies and 309 million of fully diluted shares outstanding, and this includes only anti-dilutive share buybacks.
All this translates to a fiscal year 2021 non-GAAP earnings per share expected to be between $3.57 and $3.67 per share, resulting in double-digit growth at the midpoint.
Finally, we expect operating cash flow of approximately $1 billion to $1.05 billion and an increase in capital expenditures to $200 million, driven by our NASD expansion.
We have also announced raising our dividend by 8%, continuing an important streak of dividend increases, providing another source of value to our shareholders.
Now let's finish with our first quarter guidance.
But before we get into the specifics, some additional context.
Many places around the world are currently seeing renewed spikes in COVID-19 that could cause some additional economic uncertainty.
And while we're extremely pleased with the momentum we have built during Q4, we are taking a prudent approach to our outlook for Q1, because of the current situation with the pandemic.
For Q1, we're expecting revenue to range from $1.42 billion to $1.43 billion, representing reported growth of 4.5% to 5.5% and core growth of 3.5% to 4.5%.
And first quarter 2021 non-GAAP earnings are expected to be in the range of $0.85 to $0.88 per share.
To be where we are now after knowing where we stood in March is truly remarkable.
Add to this, the strong momentum we saw in Q4, I truly believe we are well positioned to accelerate our growth in fiscal 2021.
With that, Ankur, back to you for Q&A.
David, let's provide the instructions for Q&A.
