I'm pleased to report that we started the year strong, delivering another solid quarter.
Both segments got off to a good start.
As a company, we achieved $222 million in revenues and excellent bottom line performance, with GAAP earnings per share of $0.85 or $0.87 per share on an adjusted basis.
Our cash flow generation was particularly good for first quarter.
And we continue to pay down debt and have a healthy balance sheet, which enables investment in future growth.
I'm particularly proud of how our employees continue to perform through the pandemic.
Even while following our COVID-19 protocols and safety procedures, our operating teams are driving process improvements with Lean Kaizen.
Our R&D teams are working on the next generation of materials and products, and we continue to do a great job for our customers in delivery, quality and service.
Our Machine Clothing segment had its strongest quarterly top line performance since 2015, with revenues up nearly $12 million year-over-year and good order activity in Q1, which bodes well for this year.
In fact, other than the secular decline in publication grades, Machine Clothing end market demand in packaging, tissue, pulp and engineered fabrics were all positive in Q1.
In addition to a solid backlog, our engineering teams are hard at work developing new technology belts for our customers, which is critical to our success and value proposition.
We have seen some instances of isolated supply constraints impacting raw material pricing and delivery timing in this segment, and we continue to actively manage our supply chain, securing the materials we need to support our customers' demand.
In summary, our Machine Clothing segment continues to perform well.
serving customers around the world as the recognized global leader supplying these critical consumable components to the paper industry.
This success is the result of a disciplined execution of our long-term strategy.
In Aerospace, as we reported last quarter, our Engineered Composites segment will be grinding through a year of destocking of excess inventory in the channels for LEAP, Boeing 787 and F-35 products.
That said, Engineered Composites is on track with their plan and ready for the upturn as commercial air transport improves, inventory in the channels is consumed and our production is back in sync with aircraft OEM production.
We're on good platforms that we expect will recover, and we continue to do this as a time to further improve our operations.
We're ready and looking forward to the upturn.
We're working closely with Safran to coordinate our operations as the LEAP engine production ramps up, supporting the Airbus A320neo and Boeing 737 MAX.
With domestic air travel recovering first and fueling demand for narrow-body aircraft, A320neo and Boeing 737 MAX are in the sweet spot of the air transport recovery.
In Engineered Composites, looking beyond our current portfolio of programs, our opportunity pipeline is as full as it's ever been.
We're developing a breadth of capability to be the next-generation supplier of advanced composite materials.
This ranges from our proprietary 3D woven composites currently used on LEAP engine fan blades and hand cases to automated fiber placement composite wing skins for Lockheed Martin's F-35 Joint Strike Fighter to complex components on the Sikorsky CH-53K helicopter.
We continue to develop applications for the Wing of Tomorrow program with Airbus Industries, and we're investing more this year in R&D projects with new customers and new platforms using advanced materials such as our 3D woven composites on a range of exciting applications, including unmanned hypersonic and electric aircraft.
The sum of these efforts furthers our goal to diversify and grow our customer base and broaden our material science capabilities.
As I mentioned, we have a strong balance sheet and good free cash flow generation.
These allow us to sustain our investment in the technology and customer programs that expand...
...ed as cash flow from operations less capital expenditures, of $21.1 million, compared to a use of over $19 million in the same quarter last year, driven primarily by improvements in AEC working capital.
We were pleased with the cash flow performance of the AEC segment this quarter, which swung from a significant use in the same quarter last year to significant cash generation this year.
Capital expenditures in Q1 of each year were approximately $13 million.
Our absolute net leverage ratio is now 0.65, providing us with a very strong balance sheet, allowing us to take advantage of organic and acquired growth opportunities.
As we look forward to the balance of 2021, the outlook for the Machine Clothing segment remained strong.
Compared to the same quarter last year, MC orders were down 2%.
However, as you may recall, near the end of Q1 in 2020, orders spiked from customers who are concerned about the availability of supply in light of the emerging pandemic.
Further, from a backlog perspective, we are in a stronger position entering Q1 in 2021 than we were in 2020.
So overall, we are feeling good about our previously issued guidance of revenue for the segment of between $570 million and $590 million.
From a margin perspective in Machine Clothing, we delivered another strong quarter, with adjusted EBITDA margins north of 37%.
I should note that some of the headwinds we projected this year, most notably a return to normal levels of travel and the absence of the foreign exchange benefits we enjoyed during the middle last year, have yet to impact our comparative results.
That said, we are pleased with our performance for the quarter.
While we are maintaining our adjusted EBITDA guidance for the segment of $195 million to $205 million, we are currently trending toward the upper portion of that range.
Turning to Engineered Composites.
We are seeing the expected impact of the 787 frames channel destocking in our top line results.
During the quarter, we generated less than $1 million of revenue from the 787 frames program compared to over $12 million in the same quarter last year.
I already noted that the ASC LEAP program was also down by about $12 million during the quarter.
These two programs account for almost all of the year-over-year decline in AEC revenue that we saw during the quarter.
As a result of these declines, the share of AEC revenue derived from defense programs grew to over 48% during the quarter.
That said, we will still see the previously disclosed revenue impact from F-35 channel destocking in the second and third quarters.
So I would expect the defense program share of AEC revenues to dip somewhat over the next couple of quarters.
This will also make the second and third quarters quite challenging for the segment overall.
The year is shaping up in line with expectations for the segment, and we are maintaining our guidance range of $275 million to $295 million for segment revenues.
From a profitability perspective, our performance to date is broadly in line with our expectations, and we are maintaining our AEC adjusted EBITDA guidance of $55 million to $65 million.
We are also maintaining all of our previously issued guidance ranges for company-level performance, with the exception of guidance for GAAP earnings per share, which has been updated to reflect non-GAAP adjustments recorded in Q1.
Current guidance is as follows: revenue of between $850 million and $890 million; effective income tax rate of 28% to 30%; depreciation amortization of between $70 million and $75 million; capital expenditures in the range of $50 million to $60 million, GAAP earnings per share of between $2.38 and $2.78, down slightly from prior guidance of $2.40 and $2.80; adjusted earnings per share of between $2.40 and $2.80; and adjusted EBITDA of between $195 million and $220 million.
Overall, we are very pleased with how the year is progressing and hope to see a continued progression to normalcy in the balance of the year.
Over to you, Greg.
