You can access this announcement on the Investor Relations page of our website, www.
aam.com, and through the PR newswire services.
You can also find supplemental slides for this conference call on the Investor page of our website as well.
For additional information, we ask that you refer to our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Information regarding these non-GAAP measures as well as a reconciliation of these non-GAAP measures to GAAP financial information is available on our website.
With that, let me turn things over to AAM's Chairman and CEO, David Dauch.
Joining me on the call today are Mike Simonte, AAM's President; and Chris May, AAM's Vice President and Chief Financial Officer.
To begin my comments today, I'll review the highlights of our third quarter 2021 results.
I'll then touch on some exciting business development news, including electrification announcements with REE and our largest customer, General Motors.
And lastly, we'll discuss the ongoing supply chain challenges and our financial outlook.
After Chris covers the details of our financial results, we will then open up the call for any questions that you may have.
AAM delivered solid operating performance in the third quarter of 2021 despite unprecedented supply chain challenges that impacted industry production in the third quarter.
When we reported second quarter earnings, our expectation was that the worst of the shortage was behind us.
This turned out not to be the case.
Production volatility stemming from the semiconduct -- chip shortage took another leg down, which eventually forced OEMs to idle production at many facilities, including their full-size truck plants that were largely protected previously.
However, the AAM team did a great job in managing these obstacles and factors under our control, resulting in solid financial performance.
AAM sales for the third quarter of 2021 were $1.21 billion, down approximately 14% compared to $1.41 billion in the third quarter of 2020.
The decrease in our revenues on a year-over-year basis primarily reflects the impact of the semiconductor supply chain disruptions of nearly $245 million.
North American industry production was down approximately 25% according to third-party estimates.
Light truck production was down 20% year-over-year and volumes on our core platforms decreased significantly from a year ago.
The industry is at a point where a lack of inventory has begun to impact retail sales.
Days supply on key products that we support were at or below 30 days with certain platforms in single digits and large SUVs closer to 20 days.
Once the supply chain issues are resolved, which will take some time, we foresee an extended recovery to meet customer demand and replenish dealer inventories.
AAM is in a great position to benefit from the strong demand in light trucks, especially pickups and SUVs and the replenishment of crossover vehicles.
AAM's adjusted EBITDA in the third quarter of 2021 was $183 million or 15.1% of sales.
This compares to $297 million last year.
Excluding the impact of metal markets and currency, our EBITDA margins would have approximated 19%.
This is a testament to our optimization efforts and our strong cost control, yielding strong EBITDA conversion.
AAM's adjusted earnings per share in the third quarter of 2021 was $0.15 per share compared to $1.15 in the third quarter of 2020.
As for cash flow, we continue to generate positive free cash flow in the third quarter.
AAM's adjusted free cash flow was approximately $69 million.
Earlier this year, we announced a development agreement with REE.
We are pleased to share that we have secured an initial platform business award with our partner, and AAM plans to supply REE with high-performance electric drive units for its highly modular and disruptive REEcorner technology that enables full flat EV chassis for multiple applications.
This is a great electrification opportunity for AAM and its validation of our innovative industry-leadi...
...ed significant customer interest in our new products and technology.
Now let's move on to interest and taxes.
Net interest expense was $47 million in the third quarter of 2021 compared to $50.5 million in the third quarter of 2020.
We expect this favorable trend to continue as we benefit from continued debt reductions.
In the third quarter, we redeemed $100 million of our 6.25% notes due 2025 and refinanced the remaining $600 million balance.
In the third quarter of 2021, we reported an income tax benefit of $13.6 million compared to a benefit of $22.5 million in the third quarter of 2020.
As we near the end of 2021, we expect our effective tax rate to be approximately 10% to 15%.
We would also expect our cash taxes to be in the $25 million to $30 million range.
Taking all these sales and cost drivers into account, our GAAP net loss was $2.4 million, or $0.02 per share, in the third quarter of 2021 compared to an income of $117.2 million, or $0.99 per share, in the third quarter of 2020.
Let's now move on to cash flow and the balance sheet.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the third quarter of 2021 was $89.8 million compared to $249.5 million last year.
Capital expenditures net of proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment for the third quarter of 2021 was $33.2 million.
Cash payments for restructuring and acquisition-related activity for the third quarter of 2021 were $9 million.
The net cash outflow related to the recovery from the Malvern fire we experienced in September of 2020 was $3.5 million in the quarter.
However, we anticipate the Malvern fire to have a neutral cash impact for the full year as timing of cash expenditures and cash insurance proceeds aligned over time.
In total, we would expect $55 million to $65 million in cash payments for restructuring and acquisition costs in 2021.
Reflecting the impact of this activity, AAM generated adjusted free cash flow of $69.1 million in the third quarter of 2021.
From a debt leverage perspective, we ended the quarter with net debt of $2.6 billion and LTM adjusted EBITDA of $930.2 million, calculating a net leverage ratio of 2.8 times at September 30.
We are focused on improving the balance sheet and delivering on our goal to improve our leverage this year.
We have made meaningful progress in reducing our gross debt outstanding and reducing our leverage ratio by more than a full turn as of the end of the third quarter.
Before we move on to the Q&A portion of the call, let me close out my comments with some thoughts on our 2021 financial outlook.
We expect adjusted EBITDA to be in the range of $830 million to $850 million.
Just as a reminder, investors need to consider the impact of the metal market pass-throughs as it relates to our margin calculations when comparing from period to period.
In periods and environment such as this, it is meaningful.
We expect to generate approximately $400 million of adjusted free cash flow in 2021, or nearly 50% adjusted free cash flow to adjusted EBITDA conversion.
We expect our capital expenditures at less than 4% of sales as our capital reuse and optimization efforts continue to deliver results.
Our updated outlook is based on the latest and best information we have regarding customer production schedules.
We continue to assume our customers will prioritize building full-size pickup trucks and SUVs through the end of the year with minimal disruptions.
However, the operating environment remains choppy with multiple factors posing a risk to the supply chain.
As volumes begin to normalize, we should be in a great position to leverage that environment to generate profits and cash flow.
This in turn will be used to support our highly advanced research and development initiatives in electrification and solidly position us for future profitable growth aligned with our capital allocation priorities.
We have reserved some time to take questions.
So at this time, please feel free to proceed with any questions you may have.
