Before we get started, I want to let you know that we have slides to accompany our discussion.
Reconciliations of non-GAAP measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures are posted on our website as well.
So turning to the agenda on Slide three.
I'll start with some highlights of the second quarter before handing it over to John, who will go into more detail on our performance.
Let's start with an overview of the quarter, turning to Slide four.
We're very pleased with how we've managed our operations as well as our earnings at risk with the appropriate level of discipline.
We also helped our customers navigate and manage through the volatility of this quarter that came from weather issues, domestic and international supply chain challenges and other complexities in the current environment.
Turning now to our segment performance.
Results in Agribusiness were down versus a very strong quarter last year but exceeded our expectations as the team effectively managed trade flows and capacity utilization.
We set quarterly and year-to-date records in soy crush volume, capacity utilization and lower unplanned downtime.
Additionally, we reduced power consumption to an all-time low in our European rapeseed crush operations.
While we faced complexities in the quarter related to freight, transportation and other areas that affected many other companies and industries, our results clearly demonstrate that with our commercial and industrial teams working closely together, we have built resilient supply chains that allow us to be successful through a range of macro environments.
Results in Refined and Specialty Oils improved in most regions, with particular strength in North America.
In the U.S., we saw foodservice demand come back stronger and faster than and anticipated, and we're experiencing a greater impact from renewable diesel demand than we expected.
In response to the higher demand for Refined and Specialty Oils, we've been working to find greater efficiencies to increase supply.
We've also worked with our food customers to help them manage their risk as well as reformulate products where it makes sense.
The multiple drivers behind the strength in edible oils gives us confidence there are significant growth opportunities ahead of us.
I also want to highlight that this was a strong quarter for our noncore Sugar JV.
As we've noted in the past, we continue to assess our strategic options regarding this business, but we're very pleased with the improvement over the last year.
Taking into account our year-to-date results and based on what we can see now in the forward curves, we are increasing our outlook for the year and expect to deliver adjusted earnings per share of at least $8.50 for the full year 2021.
Despite the global volatility, we have confidence in our ability to deliver in the back half of the year, based on the business already committed, the crush outlook and the demand for Refined and Specialty Oils.
As we look ahead, we're confident that the performance of our operating model and market trends provide support for a higher mid-cycle earnings.
So in our June 2020 business update, we outlined our earnings baseline of $5 per share.
With the changes we've made in our business as well as the fundamental shifts in the marketplace, we're taking that baseline earnings per share up to $7, and that's a $2 increase.
And consistent with last time, this reflects our existing portfolio only and does not include any future growth investments.
I'll now hand the call over to John to walk through the financial results, the 2021 outlook and additional detail on the updated earnings baseline.
I'll then close with additional thoughts on some of the trends we're seeing.
Let's turn to the earnings highlights on Slide five.
Our reported second quarter earnings per share was $2.37 compared to $3.47 in the second quarter of 2020.
Our reported results include a negative mark-to-market timing difference of $0.24 per share.
Adjusted ...
...ore sensitive to oil demand, by about $10 a metric ton to a range of $48 to $52 per metric ton.
We feel these ranges reflect more reasonable normalized numbers in the go-forward structural market environment.
We have also increased the normalized earnings of our oilseed origination and distribution businesses and our merchandising subsegment, reflecting the more coordinated and aligned approach within the value chains from our new operating model.
The approximate 30% increase in Refined and Specialty Oils earnings is driven by a higher capacity utilization in North American refining and increased contribution from specialty oils due to improvement initiatives that are underway.
Importantly, we assume that margins in North American refining normalize back to historical averages as we expect in time that the renewable diesel industry will add pretreatment capabilities to their facilities.
There are no changes from our prior baseline in Milling.
Corporate and Other are down primarily due to higher performance-based compensation from the increase in our baseline.
There is no change in the assumed contribution from our Sugar and Bioenergy JV.
Net interest expense is reduced by approximately $25 million compared to the $5 baseline, reflecting debt paydown from strong cash flow in 2021 and normalized working capital.
Given potential tax policy changes in the future, we are increasing our estimated effective tax rate by two percentage points.
It's important to note that our earnings baseline of $7 is not earnings powered.
Aside from upside that may come from higher-margin environment, we have a number of opportunities that we are pursuing that can drive earnings upside as summarized on Slide 16.
Strengthening our Oilseeds platform with targeted acquisitions is a top priority.
Expanding our industry-leading Refined and Specialty Oils position to serve new and existing customers with differentiated products and services is an area of opportunity.
We're also excited about the growth and demand for renewable feedstocks and plant-based proteins.
And finally, we're continuing to invest in technology that will drive increased efficiency throughout our global operations.
Turning to Slide 17.
At a $7 per share baseline, we should generate approximately $1.4 billion of adjusted funds from operations.
After allocating capital to sustaining capex and preferred and common dividends to shareholders, we should have about $800 million of discretionary cash available annually for reinvestment in the business or returns to shareholders.
This is an increase of approximately $200 million of cash per year from our $5 baseline.
With that, I'll turn things back over to Greg for some closing comments.
Before opening the call to Q&A, I want to offer a few closing thoughts.
From where we sit, it's clear there's a structural shift underway in the consumer demand for sustainable food, feed and fuel.
The conversations we've been having with existing and new customers are significantly different than they were even just six months ago.
We're pleased with our position to help support meaningful change.
And with our global platform, we have the ability to do so at scale.
Consumers have demonstrated they will pay more to get what they care about, and it's our job to provide these alternatives to our customers.
To meet this demand, we work with customers on sourcing sustainable alternatives under -- or helping them reformulate.
We help food and feed customers source ingredients to minimize the carbon impact of moving them, and we work with fuel customers to source and transport feedstock for renewable fuels.
Importantly, we do all of this with the goal of driving value back to farmers to allow them to invest in stewardship, to support regenerative agriculture and to encourage production in optimal locations, which means getting the highest production per acre using the least amount of inputs.
We're really excited about the role we can play in this accelerating shift.
