Last night, we released results for our first quarter of fiscal year 2021 copies of which are posted in the Investor Relations section of our website.
In order to provide greater transparency regarding our operating performance, we will refer to certain non-GAAP financial measures that involve adjustments to GAAP results.
Any non-GAAP financial measures presented should not be considered to be an alternative to financial measures required by GAAP.
I'm very pleased with the exceptional operating results we've reported as we saw a strengthening recovery across our end markets.
For the quarter, we generated record adjusted earnings per share of $1.18 and segment EBIT of $140 million.
The results were driven by improving demand trends, robust unit margins, disciplined operational execution, and strong performance in our targeted growth initiatives.
I'd like to recognize the extraordinary employees of Cabot, whose team work and commitment made it possible for us to meet the dynamic needs of our customers while maintaining the safety of our people and our communities.
The COVID pandemic has challenged our normal ways of working, but I believe our strong culture of connectivity and collaboration enabled us to distinguish Cabot in the marketplace, and we will continue to build on these strengths into 2021.
During the quarter, we saw strong volumes in the tire and automotive markets as the recovery momentum continued globally with a sharp rebound of the lows experienced last spring.
We are pleased to see that miles driven trends have improved, though still generally lagged pre-COVID levels.
In terms of automotive builds, a similar trend has taken hold.
With both end markets still below prior peaks, we are optimistic about our growth runway as the economic recovery strengthens.
As highlighted in previous calls, we experienced real strength throughout 2020 for products sold into the infrastructure, packaging and consumer sectors and this continued in our first fiscal quarter of 2021.
Our strong product portfolio, global reach and technical support have enabled us to capitalize on favorable infrastructure trends in wire and cable, pipe and geo membranes.
Additionally, the COVID pandemic has changed certain consumer behaviors and these trends are supportive of our packaging and consumer-driven applications.
While the underlying end market trends are favorable, there likely was some level of channel replenishment in the quarter as the combination of sharply [Technical Issues] and low inventories in most value chains created upward pressure on orders.
We are also seeing tightness across transportation modes globally and the supply chain uncertainty is likely causing customers to build some inventory to mitigate disruptions.
I would like to spend a little time now on China.
[Technical Issues] had driven some softening in that market.
We are seeing real strength there now.
China was the only major economy to avoid a recession in 2020 and the market there was very strong for us in Q1 as PMI hit 57 and industrial production surged.
As we look forward, our belief in the fundamentals of the China market is strong and our long-standing strategic assumptions remain sound.
Given that almost 40% of the world's tires are produced in China and 50% of the world's silicones, our differentiated position there means we are extremely well-positioned for growth.
We believe that the feedstock markets will be in balance over the long-term, which should provide a foundation of stability over time.
And finally we expect environmental pressures will continue to ratchet and Cabot's leadership and sustainability will position us in a differentiated way relative to competition.
Looking at our segments, Reinforcement Materials generated record EBIT performance in the quarter driven by very strong results in Asia as our focus on margin paid off.
Our global footprint and focus on operational excellence are the foundations of our customer value proposition and I believe ...
...ransition to a long-term supply agreement.
Looking ahead to the second quarter, we expect to see a sequential EBIT increase from improved pricing and product mix for specialty applications and lower fixed cost.
I will now turn to corporate items.
We ended the quarter with a cash balance of $147 million, and our liquidity position remains strong at approximately $1.5 billion.
During the first quarter of fiscal 2021, cash flows from operating activities were $21 million, which included a working capital increase of $99 million.
The working capital increase was largely driven by growth related to net working capital, as accounts receivables increased with higher sales and inventory increased from purchases of higher cost raw materials.
The change in net working capital also included the final payment of $33 million related to the prior year respirator settlement.
Capital expenditures for the first quarter of fiscal 2021 were $29 million.
For the full year, we expect capital expenditures to be between $175 million and $200 million.
This estimate includes continued EPA related compliance spend and capital related to upgrading our new China carbon black plant to produce specialty products.
Additional uses of cash during the quarter included $20 million for dividend.
Our operating tax rate was 30% for the first quarter of fiscal 2021, and we continue to anticipate the fiscal year rate will be between 28% and 30%.
We are very pleased with the record results in the first quarter of 2021 with volumes recovering from the COVID-related lows we experienced in fiscal 2020 and the great execution across the organization.
We achieved record-setting results in Reinforcement Materials and much improved performance in the Performance Chemicals' segment.
This is a great start to our fiscal year.
As I look at the second quarter, there are some tailwinds that benefited our results in the first quarter that we don't expect to repeat.
Based on the underlying business performance, we expect adjusted earnings per share in the second quarter to be in the range of $0.90 to a $1.
While I expect our second quarter adjusted earnings per share to moderate from the first quarter, I believe this level of expected earnings in the second quarter reflects how well our businesses are performing in the current environment.
January volumes were strong and we anticipate the underlying demands in our key end markets will remain robust during the quarter driving year-over-year EBIT growth across all segments.
On the cash side, we anticipate our cash and liquidity will remain robust.
Net working capital increases should moderate from what we saw in the first quarter with more consistent volume levels going forward.
As the fiscal year unfolds, we expect the environment will remain uncertain and there are several factors that we will be managing closely.
The first is the level and timing of COVID-19 vaccine distribution across the world and its impact on the economic recovery.
Infection rates remain very high in many parts of the world and the stability of economic growth will depend on favorable trends in reducing the level of infection.
Next is Global Logistics where we have begun to see some negative impact in terms of availability and cost of transportation in our supply chain.
This influence is being felt across global value chains and may take some time to fully stabilize.
And finally, the movement of pricing and input costs particularly in the spot markets in Asia.
We have demonstrated our ability to execute well over the past year no matter what the challenge and I have confidence that this will continue in the year to come.
Our company's true character has been showcased during these times of adversity.
I am proud of how the team has responded with great resilience and a focus on our customers, our communities and one another.
Our exceptional first quarter results are a true testament to our company's capabilities and that position us well for a successful 2021.
