The pandemic has given us an opportunity to display our agility as a company.
We increased our communications with retailers.
We changed our marketing messages.
We shifted investments to categories that are most important to consumers.
And we set new production records for VITAFUSION, ARM & HAMMER laundry and ARM & HAMMER baking soda.
And we've moved people to focus on the online class of trade.
So we've been proactive in seizing the opportunities presented by the crisis and are increasing manufacturing capacity in our plants and externally with new co-packers.
The agility and resilience of the Church & Dwight team is showing up in our results.
Our priorities continue to be employee safety, meeting the needs of consumers and retailers, helping the communities where we live and ensuring the strength of our brands.
Our plant, warehouse and laboratory employees have done an exceptional job in keeping safe, which has contributed to our ability to operate our supply chain.
Our office employees continue to work remotely and are doing a super job running the company.
So now let's talk about the results.
Q3 was another exceptional quarter.
Reported sales growth was 13.9% and adjusted earnings per share was $0.70.
Revenue, earnings and operating cash flow were all significantly higher in Q3 than last year, driven by the significant increase in demand for many of our products.
Organic sales grew 9.9%, driven by higher consumption.
Regarding e-commerce, we were already strong pre-COVID and well positioned online.
In Q3, our online sales increased by 77% as all retailer.coms have grown.
One example would be gummy vitamins.
In 2019, 8% of our full year sales were online.
This year, we expect full year to be about 14% online.
Recall, we began the year targeting 9% online sales as a percentage of global consumer sales.
In Q1, it was 10% online; Q2, 13%; and Q3, also 13%.
So we expect the full year to be actually close to 13% as well.
We continue to conduct research on the purchasing habits of U.S. consumers.
There's no surprises here, actually.
There is continued consumer concern that stores will run out of stock and websites will face delivery issues.
Consumers report that they are consolidating shopping trips and continue to stockpile to ensure that they have enough product for a couple of weeks at a time.
If we look at year-to-date shipment and consumption patterns, our brands remain generally in balance in the 15 categories in which we compete.
With respect to our brands, we had broad-based consumption growth in Q3.
We saw a double-digit consumption growth in VITAFUSION and L'IL CRITTERS gummy vitamins, ARM & HAMMER baking soda, OXICLEAN, FLAWLESS, ORAJEL, NAIR, FIRST RESPONSE pregnancy kits and cleaners.
In Household, our laundry business consumption was up 4% and ARM & HAMMER cat litter was up 8%.
Water flossers is another bright spot as consumption turned slightly positive in Q3.
Although our Lunch & Learn activity continues to be significantly curtailed, we intend to continue to address this with incremental advertising.
In addition to VITAFUSION and L'IL CRITTERS, water flossers is another brand we expect to benefit from the heightened consumer focus on health and wellness.
BATISTE dry shampoo remains impacted by social distancing, with consumption down 10%, but improved sequentially compared to Q2 when consumption was down 22%.
TROJAN consumption was down 6% in Q3, but also improved sequentially when we were down 15% in Q2.
There's no doubt that consumers have made health and wellness a priority.
VITAFUSION and L'IL CRITTERS gummy vitamins saw the greatest consumption growth of any of our categories in Q3, up 49%.
The category consumption was even higher.
Our expectation is that consumer demand for gummy vitamins will remain high.
And we have new third-party capacity coming online in late Q4 to take advantage of this trend.
Consumers are focusing on health and wellness, but also, cleaning, home cooking and new grooming routines.
At...
...orted sales growth of approximately 9%, organic sales growth of approximately 8%.
And as Matt mentioned, we have strong consumption across many of our categories.
Turning to gross margin.
We previously called 150 basis point contraction in the second half.
Now we're saying down 190 basis points.
The change is primarily due to nonrecurring supply chain costs.
We also expect significant expense, and we have called flat for the year in terms of a percent of sales, which implies a step-up in Q4.
We also anticipate a lower tax rate.
As a result, we expect Q4 adjusted earnings per share to be $0.50 to $0.52 per share, excluding the acquisition earnout adjustment as we exit 2020 with momentum.
And now for the full year outlook, we now expect approximately 11% for the year 2020 sales growth, which is above our previously 9% to 10% range.
We're also raising our full year organic sales growth to approximately 9%, up from our previous 7% to 8% outlook.
We raised our cash from operations outlook to $975 million, which is up 13% versus year ago.
Turning to gross margin.
We expect gross margin to be down 20 basis points for the year, primarily due to the impact of acquisition accounting, COVID costs, incremental manufacturing and distribution capacity investments and the higher tariffs on WATERPIK.
As to tariffs, remember back in 2018, we got caught up in Tier two tariffs for which we were granted an extension in 2019.
That exemption expired and was not extended as of Q3 2020.
We continue to work on mitigating that impact.
Another word or two on gross margin.
Previously, I have said the first half of the year was plus 150 basis points on gross margin and the second half was down 150 basis points on gross margin.
And so our outlook as of last quarter was flat for the year.
And then also last quarter, you heard me walk through investments we were making in the second half of 2020.
Examples here included a new third-party logistics provider, outside storage to handle surge inventories, preliminary engineering on capacity, VMS outsourcing costs as well as other investments around automation, consumer research and analytics.
Now we're calling down 190 basis points for the back half or down 20 basis points for the year, and that implies down 250 basis points for the quarter.
We have some supply chain nonrecurring costs.
Here are a few examples.
First, because of our outsized growth, I mentioned last quarter, we're adding a new 3PL distribution center.
In the quarter, we again had stronger sales.
And as such, had duplicative outside storage locations and the new 3PL distribution center that wasn't operational.
So for a period of time, we had duplicative costs.
We're also in the process of going through make first buy decisions.
And that will trigger a couple of asset write-offs likely in Q4.
We have lean training across the plants.
And finally, due to the great results this year, higher incentive comp cost that flow through COGS.
So our full year tax rate expectations are 19%, and we also raised our adjusted earnings per share growth to 13% to 14%.
Now that we're through the outlook, I also want to spend a minute on FLAWLESS.
As you saw in the release, we had an earnout benefit of approximately $50 million in the quarter in reported earnings.
We exclude any of the earnout movements in adjusted EPS.
Some color on that swing.
As a backdrop, we bought that business for $475 million upfront and a $425 million earnout tied to year-end 2021 sales.
That sales target represented in excess of 15% CAGR for three years off of a baseline of $180 million of trailing sales.
The revised 3-year CAGR for this business is closer to 8%.
And as such, the earnout liability comes down and earnings go up.
We're still positive on this business.
And the strong consumption growth these past six months is a great indicator for the future.
As you heard from Matt, the company is well positioned as we enter 2021.
And with that, Matt and I would be happy to take any questions.
