To access the call on the Internet, please log on to Capital One's website at capitalone.com and follow the links from there.
In the second quarter, Capital One earned $3.5 billion or $7.62 per diluted common share.
Included in the results for the quarter was a $55 million legal reserve build.
Net of this adjusting item, earnings per share in the quarter was $7.71.
On a GAAP basis, pre-provision earnings increased slightly in the sequential quarter to $3.4 billion.
We recorded a provision benefit of $1.2 billion in the quarter as $541 million of charge-offs was offset by a $1.7 billion allowance release.
Revenue grew 4% in the linked quarter, largely driven by the impact of strong Domestic Card purchase volume on noninterest income and the absence of the mark on our Snowflake investment a quarter ago.
Period-end loans held for investment grew $6.5 billion or 3%, inclusive of the effect of moving $4.1 billion of loans to held-for-sale during the quarter.
The loans moved to held-for-sale consisted of $2.6 billion of an International Card partnership portfolio and $1.5 billion in commercial loans.
Turning to Slide 4.
I will cover the changes in our allowance in the quarter.
We released $1.7 billion of allowance, primarily driven by observed strong credit performance and an improved economic outlook.
Turning to Slide 5.
We provide the allowance coverage ratios by segment.
You can see allowance coverage declined in the quarter across all segments, largely reflecting the dynamics I just described.
However, coverage ratios remain well above pre-pandemic levels due to continued economic uncertainty as our allowance is built to absorb a wide range of outcomes.
Our Domestic Card coverage is now 8.9%, down from 10.5% last quarter.
Our branded card coverage is 10.1%.
Recall that the difference between branded and domestic coverage is largely driven by the loss sharing agreements in some of our partnership portfolios.
Coverage in our consumer business declined about 60 basis points to 3%.
In addition to continued strong credit performance and improved economic outlook, historically high auto values aided the reduction in coverage.
Coverage in our Commercial Banking business declined about 25 basis points to 1.7%, with the single largest driver being the improvement in our energy portfolio.
Turning to Page 6.
I'll now discuss liquidity.
You can see our preliminary average liquidity coverage ratio during the first -- during the quarter was 141%.
The LCR continues to be well above the 100% regulatory requirement.
Our liquidity reserves from cash, securities and Federal Home Loan Bank capacity ended the quarter at approximately $137 billion.
The $14 billion decline in total liquidity was driven by lower ending cash balances.
Our cash position declined in the quarter as it was redeployed to net loan growth, wholesale funding maturities, a modest increase in our securities portfolio and share repurchases.
Moving to Page 7.
I'll now discuss net interest margin.
You can see that our second quarter net interest margin was 5.89%, 10 basis points lower than the prior quarter.
The linked-quarter decline in NIM was largely driven by lower yield in our card portfolio, where the typical seasonal decrease in revolve rate was exacerbated by higher transactor volume and associated higher payments.
These impacts were partially offset by the favorable impact from one more day in the quarter.
Lastly, turning to Slide 8.
I will cover our capital position.
Our common equity Tier 1 capital ratio was 14.5% at the end of the second quarter, down 10 basis points from the first quarter.
Loan growth and capital actions were largely offset by earnings growth.
During the quarter, the Federal Reserve released the results of their stress test.
Our stress capital buffer requirement, which will be effective on October 1 of this year, is 2.5%, resulting in a total capital requirement by the Fed of 7%.
While we saw a decline in this year's SCB, it's important to note that the...
...wth in our auto business.
Second quarter ending deposits in the consumer bank were up $4.4 billion or 2% year over year.
Average deposits were up 9% year over year.
Consumer Banking revenue increased 27% from the prior-year quarter, driven by growth in auto loans and retail deposits.
Second-quarter provision for credit losses improved by $1.2 billion year over year, driven by an allowance release and lower charge-offs in our auto business.
Credit results in our auto business are strikingly strong.
Year over year, the second quarter charge-off rate improved 120 basis points to negative 0.12%, and the delinquency rate was essentially flat at 3.26%.
In the quarter, elevated used car prices drove an increase in auction proceeds, amplifying the normal seasonal benefit we see from tax refunds around this time of the year.
As used vehicle prices normalize, they will become a headwind to the auto charge-off rate.
we expect the auto charge-off rate to increase from the unusually low second quarter level.
Moving to Slide 13.
I'll discuss our Commercial Banking business.
Second quarter ending loan balances were down 5% year over year.
Average loans were down 7%.
Commercial line utilization continues to be down year over year, and we moved $1.5 billion of commercial real estate loans to held-for-sale.
Quarterly average deposits increased 22% from the second quarter of 2020 and 5% from the linked quarter as middle market and government customers continue to hold elevated levels of liquidity.
Second-quarter revenue was up 3% from the prior-year quarter and down 6% from the linked quarter.
The linked quarter decline is more than entirely driven by a one-time cost associated with moving the commercial real estate loans to held for sale.
This decline was offset by an equivalent one-time gain in the other category and is therefore neutral to the company.
Excluding this effect, Commercial Banking revenue would have increased about 13% year over year and 4% from the linked quarter.
Provision for credit losses improved significantly compared to the second quarter of 2020, driven by a swing from an allowance build to an allowance release and a swing from net charge-offs to net recoveries.
In the second quarter, the Commercial Banking annualized charge-off rate was negative 11 basis points.
The criticized performing loan rate was 7.6%, and the criticized nonperforming loan rate was 1%.
Our Commercial Banking business is delivering solid performance as we continue to build our commercial capabilities.
I'll close tonight with some thoughts on our results and our strategic positioning.
Several key themes are evident in our second quarter results.
Credit remains strikingly strong.
Purchase volume and loans are rebounding.
We're continuing to invest to propel our future results, and we're returning capital to our shareholders.
We are seeing increasing near-term opportunities to build our Domestic Card business as we emerge from the pandemic.
We are leaning further into marketing to seize these opportunities.
We are also increasing our marketing for auto, national banking and our brand.
We are now in the ninth year of a journey to build a modern technology company from the bottom of the tech stack up.
Our progress is accelerating, and the stakes are rising.
Competitor tech investments are increasing as technology is increasingly seen as an existential issue.
The investment flowing into fintechs is nothing short of breathtaking.
And the war for tech talent continues to escalate, including levels of compensation.
We continue to invest in technology and the opportunities that emerge as our transformation gains traction.
Our modern technology is powering our current performance and setting us up to capitalize on the accelerating digital revolution in banking.
We'll now start the Q&A session.
[Operator instructions] If you have follow-up questions after the Q&A session, the Investor Relations team will be available after the call.
Holly, please start the Q&A.
