Sales in the second quarter were $129.6 million, up 54% compared to the same period in 2020.
Customer demand remains robust, while supply challenges persist especially for automotive products.
Second quarter gross margin was 36.8%, up 525 basis points from 31.6% in the second quarter of 2020.
Though improved, gross margin performance continues to be impacted by semiconductor and commodity price increases, as well as increased logistics costs.
EBITDA margin of 21.5% was up 480 basis points from 16.7% in the same period last year.
Second quarter adjusted earnings per share of $0.52 were up 225% from $0.16 in the second quarter of 2020.
Later, Ashish will add color to the GAAP performance including a non-cash charge related to the U.S. pension plan termination.
Operating cash flow of $19 million was up from $12 million in the second quarter of 2020.
New business awards of $174 million were solid and up from $105 million in the same period last year.
Ashish Agrawal, our CFO, is with me for today's call and will take us through the Safe Harbor statement.
And more information can be found in the company's SEC Filings.
To the extent that today's discussion refers to any non-GAAP measures under Regulation G, the required explanations and reconciliations are available in the Investor section of the CTS website.
I will now turn the discussion back over to our CEO, Kieran O'Sullivan.
In the second quarter, our sales were $129.6 million, up 54% from the second quarter of 2020.
Excluding sales from the acquisition of Sensor Scientific, sales were up 52% organically.
The SSI acquisition continues to deliver solid growth.
As I referenced in our last earnings call, we expected the transportation sales run rate to be slightly lower than our first quarter 2021 performance due to ongoing supply challenges.
Our teams worked creatively and diligently to secure parts, approved substitutions and adapt with speed to support our customers.
Transportation sales while up 88% from the same period last year would have been stronger by a few million dollars if we did not have these supply challenges.
We expect the supply challenges and some customer shutdowns to persist in the second half.
New business awards were $174 million for the quarter, up from $105 million in the same period last year.
We added three new customers in the quarter; two in transportation and one in telecom.
In Asia, we added a new transportation customer in China for a large platform that would ship in the 2023 timeframe.
Across the accelerator modules, we had wins with two existing customers in China, secured awards with two Japanese OEMs for the North American market and added a new electric vehicle customer in Europe.
With passive safety sensors, we had wins with existing Tier 1 customers across all three regions with one of the wins for an EV application.
In Europe and North America, we had wins for throttle position and transmission position sensing.
Bookings and sales for two-wheeler applications were strong in Asia.
We continue to advance our diversification strategy by growing in non-transportation end markets.
In Defense, we had several undersea sonar wins and we also maintain good momentum with our RF filter products for GPS anti-jamming applications.
Temperature sensor wins were solid in defense, and we had an important win for an aviation application in Europe.
In Industrial, we continue to see strong demand for temperature products across pool and spa as well as HVAC applications.
We also had a large win in industrial printing, securing a two-year contract where the market has expanded into new applications such as garment printing.
Momentum in medical markets was positive but with inconsistencies regionally due to countries emerging from lockdowns and some customers being impacted by material shortages.
We had various temperature application wins and additional wins in CPAP, medical ultrasound and intravenous drug delivery.
For medical ultrasound, our design wins are inc...
...ver the last 12 months, as well as improvements in other parts of our business.
We also benefited from a larger portion of our revenue coming from the Industrial, Medical and Aerospace and Defense end markets.
Raw material price increases, as well as freight costs continue to impact us unfavorably.
And we are working closely with our customer base to offset or share these cost increases.
In the last quarter, we generated $0.03 of earnings per share in savings from our restructuring program announced in the third quarter of 2020, bringing the total savings to $0.12 of earnings per share so far.
As we mentioned back in April, the timing of some of our projects is being impacted due to the ongoing impact of COVID-19 on travel, as well as an increase in demand.
We are still on track to achieve the targeted annualized savings of $0.22 to $0.26 by the end of 2022.
SG&A and R&D expenses were $27 million or 21% for the second quarter.
Operating expenses increased primarily as a result of reinstating cost cuts made during the pandemic to offset the impact of revenue decline and higher incentive compensation expenses.
In the second quarter, we recorded a non-cash charge of $20.1 million related to the termination of the U.S. pension plan.
We are expecting the remaining non-cash charge of approximately $101 million to be booked in the third quarter when we complete the settlement process.
As a reminder, these are non-cash charges and the U.S. pension plan is expected to be overfunded at settlement.
Second quarter tax rate was 246% as a result of the impact of the pension settlement charge on our income statement.
We anticipate our 2021 tax rate to be in the range of 19% to 21% excluding the impact of the pension settlement and other discrete items.
We are carefully watching the new tax proposals and initiatives of the Biden Administration, and we'll discuss the impact on our business in the coming months as we get more clarity.
Second quarter 2021 earnings were $0.03 per diluted share.
Adjusted earnings per diluted share were $0.52 compared to $0.16 for the same period last year and $0.46 last quarter.
Now I'll discuss the balance sheet and cash flow.
Our controllable working capital is essentially flat from the end of 2020.
While we remain focused on working capital efficiency, we anticipate carrying some excess inventory where possible to manage supply chain concerns over the next few quarters.
Our operating cash flow was $19 million for the second quarter which is an improvement from $12 million in the second quarter of 2020.
We generated $16 million in free cash flow.
Capex was low in the first half primarily due to the timing of various projects.
In 2021, we expect capex to be in the range of 4% to 4.5% of sales.
Our cash balance on June 30, 2021 was $117 million, up from $92 million on December 31, 2020.
Our long-term debt balance was $50 million, down from $55 million on December 31, 2020.
Our debt to capitalization ratio was at 9.9% at the end of the second quarter compared to 11.4% at the end of 2020.
The combination of a strong balance sheet with a net cash position and access to approximately $250 million through our credit facility gives us the liquidity to make progress on the right M&A transactions.
In early July, we successfully went live on SAP at Boise, Idaho, and Tecate, Mexico.
These are locations from our first temperature acquisition.
As we had previously mentioned, more than 90% of our revenue now comes from sites that are running on SAP.
We expect to complete the rollout to our remaining sites in early 2022.
Before we wrap up, as Kieran mentioned earlier, we see a sustained demand environment in the second half of 2021.
However, supply chain challenges are expected to persist for us and our customers on both material availability and cost through the rest of the year.
Our current expectation is that Q3 could be the most challenging with some improvements in the fourth quarter.
This concludes our prepared comments.
