I'm joined by Steve Rusckowski, our Chairman, CEO and President; and Mark Guinan, our Chief Financial Officer.
Actual results may differ materially from those projected.
Risks and uncertainties, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic that may affect Quest Diagnostics' future results include, but are not limited to, those described in our most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K and subsequently filed quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and current reports on Form 8-K.
The company continues to believe that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on future operating results, cash flows and/or its financial condition will be primarily driven by the pandemic's severity and duration; healthcare insurer, government and client payer reimbursement rates for COVID-19 molecular tests; the pandemic's impact on the US healthcare system and the US economy; and the timing, scope and effectiveness of federal, state and local governmental responses to the pandemic, including the impact of vaccination efforts, which are drivers beyond the company's knowledge and control.
Any references to base business, testing, revenues or volumes refer to the performance of our business excluding COVID-19 testing.
Growth rates associated with our long-term outlook projections, including total revenue growth, revenue growth from acquisitions, organic revenue growth and adjusted earnings growth are compound annual growth rates.
Finally, revenue growth rates from acquisitions will be measured against our base business.
Now, here is Steve Rusckowski.
Well, we had a strong third quarter as COVID-19 molecular volumes increased throughout the summer.
While our base business continued to deliver solid volume growth versus the prior year and 2019.
In late summer, we experienced some softness in the base business across the country, but saw a rebound in September.
Importantly, our base business continued to improve sequentially in the third quarter, which speaks to the ongoing recovery.
We have raised our outlook for the remainder of the year based on higher than anticipated COVID-19 volumes as well as continued progress we expect to see in our base business despite rising labor costs and inflationary pressures.
The momentum of our base business positions us to deliver the 2022 outlook we shared at our March Investor Day.
But before turning to our results into the third quarter, I'd like to update you on our progress we've made in our Quest for Health Equity initiative, a more than $100 million initiative aimed at reducing healthcare disparities in underserved neighborhoods.
Since we've established just over a year ago, we have launched 18 programs across the United States and Puerto Rico ranging from supporting COVID-19 testing of vaccination events, to educating young students on healthy nutritional choices, to providing funding support for a long-haul COVID-19 clinic in Puerto Rico.
Recently, we announced a collaboration with the American Heart Association that will expand research and mentorship opportunities for Black and Hispanic scholars and drive hypertension management and COVID-19 relief.
We're off to a good start and I look forward to updating you on our continued progress as Quest for Health Equity enters its second year.
Now turning to our results for the third quarter.
Total revenue of $2.77 billion, down 40 basis points versus the prior year; earnings per share were $4.02 on a reported basis, down approximately 3% versus the prior year; and $3.96 on an adjusted basis, down 8% versus the prior year.
The revenue and earnings declines in the third quarter reflect lower COVID-19 testing in 2021 versus the prior year, partially offset by continued recovery in our base business.
Cash provided by operations increased by nearly 20% year-to-date through September to approximately $1.75 billion.
Now, starting with COVID-19 testing, our COVID-19 molecular volumes increased in the third quarter versus the second quarter due to the spread of the Delta variant over the c...
...isitions, total base testing volumes grew approximately 4% and benefited from new PLS contracts that have ramped over the last year.
We saw a rebound in our base business volumes in September following a modest softening in August that we believe was at least partially caused by the rise of the Delta variant and the timing of summer vacations.
Importantly, our base business revenue and volume grew sequentially in the third quarter.
This helps illustrate the ongoing recovery as historically total revenue and volumes typically step down in Q3 versus Q2 due to summer seasonality.
As most of you know, COVID-19 testing volumes grew in the third quarter versus Q2, which was in line with broader COVID-19 testing trends across the country.
We resulted approximately 7.6 million molecular tests and nearly 700,000 serology tests in the third quarter.
So far in October, average COVID-19 molecular volumes have declined approximately 10% from where we exited Q3 but are still above the levels we expected prior to the surge of the Delta variant, while the base business continues to improve since September.
Revenue per requisition declined 5.4% versus the prior year, driven primarily by lower COVID-19 molecular volume and, to a lesser extent, recent PLS wins.
Unit price headwinds remained modest and in line with our expectations.
Reported operating income in the third quarter was $652 million or 23.5% of revenues compared to $718 million or 25.8% of revenues last year.
On an adjusted basis, operating income in Q3 was $694 million or 25% of revenues compared to $831 million or 29.8% of revenues last year.
The year-over-year decline in operating margin was driven by lower COVID-19 testing revenue, partially offset by the recovery in our base business.
Reported earnings per share was $4.02 in the quarter compared to $4.14 a year ago.
Adjusted earnings per share was $3.96 compared to $4.31 last year.
Cash provided by operations was $1.75 billion through September year-to-date versus $1.46 billion in the same period last year.
Turning to guidance, we have raised our full-year 2021 outlook as follows.
Revenue is expected to be between $10.45 billion and $10.6 billion, an increase of approximately 11% to 12% versus the prior year.
Reported earnings per share is expected to be in the range of $14.69 [Phonetic] and $15.09 and adjusted earnings per share to be in the range of $13.50 and $13.90.
Cash provided by operations is expected to be approximately $2.2 billion and capital expenditures are expected to be approximately $400 million.
Before concluding, I'll touch on some assumptions embedded in our updated outlook.
We expect COVID-19 molecular volumes to continue to decline from Q3 levels throughout the remainder of the year.
At the low end of our outlook, we assume approximately 50,000 molecular tests per day in Q4 and serology volumes to hold relatively steady at approximately 5,000 tests per day.
As you may know, late last week, the public health emergency was again extended another 90 days through late January.
We expect reimbursement for clinical COVID-19 molecular testing to hold relatively steady through the remainder of the year.
However, we continue to assume average reimbursements to trend lower in Q4 as our mix of COVID-19 molecular volumes potentially shift from clinical diagnostic testing to more return-to-life surveillance testing.
Finally, we continue to assume low single-digit revenue growth in our base business in Q4 versus 2019.
Getting to the midpoint or higher end of our outlook ranges assumes stronger COVID-19 molecular testing volumes and/or stronger growth in our base business.
Well, to summarize, we had a strong third quarter.
We have raised our outlook for the remainder of the year based on higher than anticipated COVID-19 volumes as well as our continued progress we expect to see in our base business.
And finally, the momentum of our base business positions us to deliver the 2022 outlook we shared at our March Investor Day.
