danaher.com under the heading Quarterly Earnings.
The supplemental materials describe additional factors that impacted year-over-year performance.
We may also describe certain products and devices which, have applications submitted and pending for certain regulatory approvals or are available only in certain markets.
As a result of the size of the Cytiva acquisition and its impact on Danaher's overall core revenue growth profile, we're presenting core revenue on a basis that includes Cytiva sales.
References to core revenue growth, including Cytiva sales, and the calculation of period to period sales growth.
And we really appreciate you joining us on the call today.
Our team delivered another outstanding results in our third quarter with over 20% core revenue growth, nearly 40% adjusted earnings-per-share growth and strong free cash flow generation.
This well-rounded performance is a testament to the unique positioning of our portfolio and our exceptional team, who are committed to leading and executing with the Danaher Business System every day.
We highlighted our fantastic portfolio of market-leading franchises in highly attractive end markets, the exceptional team we have out on the field every day and how we differentiate with the Danaher Business System.
And we certainly saw this powerful combination in action during the third quarter as our results attest.
Now we also talked about our sustainability efforts, and just last week, we published our 2021 Sustainability Report.
This year's report reflect the measurable progress we've made across the three pillars of our sustainability program, which are innovation, people, and the environment, and how we use the Danaher Business System to execute on this increasingly important strategic priority.
Now I hope you all get a chance to read through the report and learn more about the important work that we're doing across Danaher to positively impact the world around us for generations to come.
So, with that, let's turn to our third quarter results.
Our sales were $7.2 billion and we delivered 20.5% core revenue growth with portfoliowide strength led by Diagnostics and Life Sciences.
Geographically, high growth markets grew approximately 25% and developed markets were up nearly 20%.
In fact, revenue in each of our three largest markets, North America, Western Europe and China was up approximately 20% or more in the quarter.
Our gross profit margin increased by 550 basis points to 60.3% primarily due to higher sales volume, the favorable impact of higher margin product mix, and the impact of prior-year purchase accounting adjustments related to the Cytiva acquisition that did not repeat in 2021.
Now, adjusted diluted net earnings per common share were $2.39 and were up 39% compared to 2020 and we generated $1.7 billion of free cash flow in the quarter, bringing our year-to-date total to $5.2 billion, which is up 46.5% year-over-year.
We continue to accelerate organic growth investments across the entire portfolio and increased our research and development spend by approximately 30% year-over-year.
At our Investor Day recently, we highlighted how we use DBS growth tools and processes to accelerate innovation and bring more impactful solutions to our customers faster.
In fact, recently launched products like the SCIEX Zeno 7600 and the Triple Quad 7500 and Beckman Life Sciences' CytoFLEX SRT benchtop cell sorter are just a few great examples of how we're driving market share gains through proprietary innovation and enhancing our growth trajectory going forward.
We're also making substantial investments to expand production capacity across our bioprocessing businesses and at Cepheid.
Near term, these investments are supporting existing customer demand and driving meaningful share gains.
But they're equally important to support the long-term growth of these businesses where we see significant runway ahead, given the underlying structural growth drivers in the sectors they serve.
And we ...
...o across Cytiva and Pall Biotech is the broadest offering in the industry with leading position in upstream and downstream applications.
And we further support our customers with best-in-class scientific services partnering to solve their most challenging problems as they move from the lab to production scale.
And our global reach enabled us to reliably and consistently meet our customers' needs.
Now in addition to the industrywide opportunities in biologics and genomic-based medicines, we continue to see significant demand related to the development and production of COVID-19 vaccine and therapeutics.
Our customers are working to address emerging variants and increased global supply, and given that only about a third of the global population has been vaccinated, we believe we'll see durable growth in this biopharma segment for the foreseeable future.
We continue to expect about $2 billion of COVID-related vaccine and therapeutic revenue in 2021.
And since we spoke at our Investor Day, we now expect to enter 2022 with approximately $2 billion in COVID-related backlog versus our previous expectation of $1.5 billion of backlog.
And moving to the clinical diagnostic market, non-COVID testing volumes are essentially back to pre-pandemic levels in most major regions as patients are returning for wellness checks, routine screening, and other elective procedures.
In molecular diagnostics, strong global demand persists for Cepheid point-of-care PCR respiratory testing as a result of the Delta variant and outbreaks, along with lower vaccine vaccination rates in many regions.
As I mentioned earlier, we shipped approximately 16 million respiratory tests during the third quarter and we now expect to ship approximately 55 million tests in 2021 versus our prior expectation of 50 million.
Now as we head into the traditional respiratory virus season, we're hearing from customers that they expect this to be a much more active season than last year's.
In preparation, their preference is for our 4-in-1 combination test, so we're seeing an uptick in demand for those cartridges, particularly given the recent outbreaks of RSV across the U.S. Cepheid's 4-in-1 test was also recently approved with a third gene target for SARS-CoV-2 detection, ensuring it can continue to accurately detect future COVID-19 viral mutations and reinforcing Cepheid's competitive advantage in the respiratory testing market.
Now moving to the applied market.
Customer activity has largely rebounded to pre-pandemic levels, which we see in robust order rates across both consumables and equipment.
In the global municipal market, consumables demand remains solid and the pace of instrument oriented project activity continues to pick up with the improving funding environment and broad return to work.
So now let's look ahead to our expectations for the fourth quarter and the full year.
We expect to deliver fourth quarter core revenue growth in the low to mid teens range, with high single-digit core revenue growth in our base business and a mid to high single-digit core growth contribution from COVID-related revenue tailwind.
Additionally, we expect to generate operating profit fall through of approximately 40% in the fourth quarter, a similar level to what we achieved in the third quarter.
Now for the full year 2021, we now expect to deliver more than 20% core tailwind and our base business will each contribute more than 10% to our 2021 core revenue growth rate.
So to wrap up, we're proud to deliver another terrific result here in the third quarter.
Our performance is a testament to the power of our unique portfolio, the strength of our end markets and our team's commitment to leading and executing with the Danaher Business System.
And this unique combination differentiates Danaher today and it reinforces our opportunities ahead for sustainable long-term outperformance.
So with that, back over to you, Matt.
That concludes our formal comments.
Emma, we're now ready to take questions.
