danaher.com under the heading Quarterly Earnings.
The supplemental materials describe additional factors that impacted year-over-year performance.
We may also describe certain products and devices which have applications submitted and pending for regulatory -- certain regulatory approvals or are only available in certain markets.
As a result of the size of the Cytiva acquisition and its impact on Danaher's overall core revenue growth profile, we are presenting core revenue on a basis that includes Cytiva sales.
References to core revenue growth exclude Cytiva sale in the calculation of period to period sales growth.
We appreciate you joining us on the call today.
We're very pleased with our strong start to the year with another terrific results in the second quarter.
We saw broad-based strength across the portfolio, which helped us deliver over 30% core revenue growth, more than 70% adjusted earnings-per-share growth and outstanding free cash flow generation.
This well-rounded performance is a testament to the positioning of our portfolio and our exceptional team who are committed to leading and executing with the Danaher Business System every day.
During the second quarter, we continued to strengthen our competitive advantage through significant high impact organic growth investments and enhanced our portfolio with strategic growth accelerating acquisition.
We prioritize innovation across Danaher and increased our production capabilities, all of which we believe contributed to the market share gains in several of our businesses.
We also announced our pending acquisition of Aldevron which will expand our presence into the fast-growing and important frontier of genomic medicine.
Putting it all together, we believe the combination of our leading portfolio and DBS driven execution differentiates Danaher today and provides a strong foundation for sustainable long-term outperformance.
So with that, let's turn to our second quarter results.
Our sales were $7.2 billion and we delivered core revenue growth of 31.5% with strong contributions from all three of our reporting segment.
Geographically, high growth markets grew nearly 35% and developed markets were up more than 25%.
Revenue in each of our three largest markets, North America, Western Europe and China was up 30% or more in the quarter.
Our gross profit margin increased by 710 basis points to 60.9% primarily due to higher sales volumes, the favorable impact of higher margin product mix and the impact of prior year purchase accounting adjustments related to the Cytiva acquisition that did not repeat in 2021.
Our operating profit margin increased to 27.8% including 775 basis points of core operating margin expansion, primarily as a result of higher gross margin and continued lower operating expense as travel and other related costs remains below pre-pandemic levels.
Adjusted diluted net earnings per common share of $2.46 were up 71% compared to 2020.
We generated $1.8 billion of free cash flow in the quarter, up over 40% year-over-year.
In June, we announced our intention to acquire Aldevron a producer of high quality plasmid DNA, mRNA and protein serving academic, biotechnology and pharmaceutical customers.
The addition of Aldevron will expand our capabilities into the important field of genomic medicine where we're seeing the accelerated adoption of gene and cell therapies, DNA and RNA vaccines and gene editing technology.
We anticipate Aldevron will be accretive to Danaher on multiple levels as we expect the business to generate $500 million of revenue in 2022, with more than 20% annual revenue growth and a strong margin profile.
We look forward to welcoming this incredibly talented and innovative team to Danaher once the transaction closes.
In addition to announcing the Aldevron acquisition we also accelerated several organic growth investments across the portfolio.
One of our core values at Danaher is innovation defines our future and we have made a significant commitment t...
...related backlog.
These assumptions do not include the potential contribution from booster shot or an expansion of availability to populations under 12-year-old due to the level of uncertainty around each of these scenarios.
Given the growing numbers of drug being developed and the increasing scientific sophistication required to discover and manufacture these complex therapies, customers are looking to partner with vendors who can reliably supply them solutions for their most challenging problems as they move from the lab to production scale.
Our comprehensive bio-processing portfolio and scientific expertise positions us well to do just that and we're confident, our proactive investments in innovation and capacity will help us meet this growing customer demand now and far into the future.
In the clinical diagnostics market, patient volumes are at or near pre-pandemic levels in most major regions as patients are returning for wellness checks, routine screenings and other elective procedures.
In molecular diagnostics, while PCR, respiratory testing volumes in the US have declined we're seeing persistent demand for Cepheid testing at the point of care.
Outside of the US, which makes up approximately half of Cepheid's revenue, we continue to see strong demand for our testing as vaccination rates lag and emerging variants drive outbreak.
Now, as I mentioned earlier we shipped approximately 14 million respiratory tests during the second quarter, up from 10 million shipped in the first quarter and we now expect to ship approximately 50 million tests in 2021.
Looking ahead with the assumption that COVID-19 will be an endemic disease, we believe that the point of care molecular respiratory testing market will expand significantly from where it was prior to the pandemic and given Cepheid's leading positioning around speed, accuracy and the ease of use workflow advantages we believe will continue to gain market share.
The combination of these market share gains, the expansion of Cepheid's leading global installed base and the broadest molecular diagnostic test menu on the market, create significant opportunities ahead for broader utilization and demand for Cepheid's point of care molecular testing solutions.
Moving to the applied markets, we're seeing a continuation of the steady improvement over the first half of the year.
Customer activity is accelerating in line with broader economic activity, which we see in healthy order rates for consumables and increasing investments equipment.
Across municipal markets globally consumables demand remains solid as customers continue to test and treat water and instrument-oriented project activity is accelerating with the improving funding environment.
Now, let's look ahead to our expectations for the third quarter and the full year.
We expect to deliver third quarter core revenue growth in the mid to high teens range.
We anticipate high single-digit core revenue growth in our base business and a high single-digit core growth contribution from COVID related revenue tailwind.
Additionally, we expect to generate operating profit fall through of approximately 40% in the third quarter and for the remainder of 2021.
For the full year 2021, we now expect to deliver approximately 20% core revenue growth.
We anticipate that COVID related revenue tailwinds will be an approximately 10% contribution to the core revenue growth rate and in our base business we now expect that core revenue will be up 10% for the full year, an increase from our prior expectation of high single-digit.
So, to wrap up we've had a great start to the year and we see meaningful opportunities across Danaher to build upon this outstanding performance.
Our second quarter results reiterate the power of our portfolio and our exceptional team, a unique combination that differentiates Danaher today and provides a strong foundation for sustainable, long-term outperformance.
And with that, back to you, Matt.
That concludes our formal comments.
