Joining me on the call today are Gene Lee, Darden's CEO; and Rick Cardenas, CFO.
We plan to release fiscal 2021 second quarter earnings on December 18 before the market opens followed by a conference call.
And then Rick will provide more detail on our financial results and share our outlook for the second quarter.
As a reminder, all references to the industry benchmark during today's call refer to estimated Knapp-Track, excluding Darden, specifically, Olive Garden and LongHorn Steakhouse.
During our first fiscal quarter, industry same restaurant sales decreased 26%.
Given the ever-changing environment we continue to operate in, I am very pleased with what we accomplished during the quarter.
We are focused on four key priorities.
The health and safety of our team members and guests, in restaurant execution in a complex operating environment, investing in and deploying technology to improve the guest experience and transforming our business model.
The progress we made in these areas combined with our operating results, gave us the confidence to repay the $270 million term loan and reinstate a quarterly dividend.
Let me provide more detail on the four priorities.
First, the health and safety of our team members and guests remains our top priority.
Following CDC guidelines and local requirements, our teams continue to practice our enhanced safety protocols, including daily team member health monitoring.
We also continue to configure our dining rooms with social distancing that create a safe, welcoming environment, while maximizing allowable capacity.
A key part of this work is installing booth partitions to enable us to safely increase capacity where permissible.
At the end of August, we had completed installation in just over 500 restaurants in our total portfolio.
Operating in this environment adds another layer of complexity to an already complex operation, and I'm proud of the commitment our teams make every day to keep our guests and each others safe.
Second, we are laser focused on our back to basics operating philosophy to drive restaurant-level execution that creates guest experience, whether that's in our dining rooms, outdoors on our patios or in their homes, but it's not easy.
Executing at a high level is more complex today due to COVID-19 restrictions that vary by market.
Additionally, the constantly changing mix between on-premise and off-premise, plus expanded outdoor dining that is weather-dependent, leads to unpredictability in sales.
This is why the work we continue to do to streamline our menus and improve our processes and procedures is so important.
Moving complexity from our operations has allowed our restaurant teams to execute more consistently in this unique environment.
Our operators continued to deliver great guest experiences by displaying a high level of flexibility, creativity and passion every day, and I'm thrilled to see that reflected in our guest satisfaction metrics.
Third, we are continuing to invest in and implement technology to remove friction from the guest experience.
This includes providing multiple ways for our guests to order inside and outside the restaurant across our digital storefronts.
Additionally, we are deploying mobile solutions to make it easy for our guests to let us know when they have arrived to dine or pickup curbside order to go.
We are also expanding mobile payment options providing additional convenience for our guests.
For our three largest brands combined, more than 50% of our off-premise sales during the quarter were fully digital transactions where guest ordered and paid online.
Finally and most importantly, we transformed our business model.
Even with the sales declines we are experiencing, our restaurants continue to produce high absolute sales volumes.
Therefore, we made the strategic decision to focus on adjusting our cost structure in order to generate strong cash flows, while making the appropriate investments in our businesses.
This provides us a stronger found...
...rkforce in the restaurant support center and field operations leadership positions.
It is expected to save between $25 million and $30 million annually.
We expect to see approximately three quarters of these savings throughout the remainder of fiscal '21.
Looking at our segment performance this quarter.
Despite a sales decline of 28%, Olive Garden increased segment profit margin by 110 basis points to 22.1%.
This strong profitability was driven by simplified operations, which reduced food and direct labor costs as well as reduced marketing spending.
LongHorn Steakhouse, Fine Dining and the other business segment delivered strong positive segment profit margins of 15.1%, 11.9% and 12.8% respectively despite a significant sales decline experienced in the quarter.
These brands also benefited from simplified operations, keeping segment profit margin at these levels.
In the first quarter, 68% of our restaurants operated with at least partial dining room capacity for the entire quarter.
These restaurants had average weekly sales per restaurant of $69,000 and the same-restaurant sales decline of 21.9%.
And while Olive Garden and the Fine Dining segment had fewer dining rooms opened than our average, these restaurants had the highest average weekly sales per restaurant of almost $76,000 and $90,000 respectively.
At the start of the second quarter, we had approximately 91% of our restaurants with dining rooms opened operating in at least limited capacity.
Now turning to our liquidity and other matters.
During the quarter, as we saw steadily improving weekly cash flows, we gained confidence in our estimated cash flow ranges.
We fully repaid the $270 million term loan we took out in April.
We ended the first quarter with $655 million in cash and another $750 million available in our untapped credit facility, giving us over $1.4 million of available liquidity.
We generated over $160 million of free cash flow in the quarter and improved our adjusted debt to adjusted capital to 59% at the end of the quarter, well within our debt covenant of below 75%.
Given our strong liquidity position, improvements in our business model and better visibility into cash flow projections, our board reinstated a quarterly dividend.
The board declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.30 per share.
This dividend represents 53% of our first quarter adjusted earnings after-tax within our long-term framework for value creation.
We will continue to have regular discussions with the board on our future dividend policy.
Our first quarter results were significantly better than we anticipated.
The actions we took to simplify menus and operating procedures and capture other cost savings, along with our choice to pursue profitable sales, have yielded strong results.
And now, with a full quarter operating under this environment, we have even better visibility into our business model.
We anticipate EBITDA between $200 million and $215 million and diluted net earnings per share between $0.65 and $0.75 on a diluted share base of 131 million shares.
In this environment, we continue to focus on building absolute sales volumes week-to-week and quarter-to-quarter.
This may result in variability in sales comparisons to last year as capacity constraints lead to less seasonality than we would have experienced historically.
Said another way, if capacity and social distancing restrictions remained similar to where they are today, it will be challenging to dramatically increase our on-premise average unit volumes.
Our second quarter is typically our lowest average unit volume quarter and our third quarter is typically our highest.
Additionally, as capacity restrictions ease and sales normalized, we will be able to reinvest to drive the top-line and a better overall guest experience.
Based on our strong business model enhancements, we now think we can get to our pre-COVID EBITDA dollars at approximately 90% of pre-COVID sales, while still making appropriate investments in our business.
