Joining me on the call today are Gene Lee, Darden's CEO; and Rick Cardenas, CFO.
We plan to release fiscal 2021 third quarter earnings on March 25 before the market opens followed by a conference call.
Rick will then provide more detail on our financial results and share our outlook for the third quarter.
And then Gene will share some closing comments.
As -- we continue to operate in a very fluid environment, and I was pleased with our ability to once again deliver strong profitability in an unpredictable sales environment.
Total sales from continuing operations were $1.7 billion, a decrease of 19.4%, same-restaurant sales decreased 20.6% and diluted net earnings per share from continuing operations were $0.74.
The last two weeks of the quarter negatively impacted our same-restaurant sales by approximately 200 basis points as we quickly went from 97% of our dining rooms being opened in the middle of the quarter to only 80% being open at the end of the quarter.
During the quarter, we remain focused on four key priorities.
The health and safety of our team members and guests, in restaurant execution in the complex operating environment, deploying technology to improve the guest experience and transforming our business model.
The health and safety of our team members and guest has always been our top priority.
We continue to follow latest guidance from the CDC as well as our own enhanced safety protocols to create a safe environment for everyone.
This includes daily team member health monitoring, requiring mask for every team member, enhanced cleaning procedures and social distancing protocols.
I'm proud of the commitment our teams make every day to keep our guests and each other safe.
Second, our restaurant teams remain focused on our Back-to-Basics operating philosophy to drive restaurant level execution that results in great guest experiences whether our guests are dining with us or ordering curbside to-go.
Our teams have been operating in this environment for 10 months, and they have become very adept at adjusting to the ever-changing COVID restrictions, but it's still not easy.
That's why we remain committed to our simplified operations, including streamline menus, processes and procedures which continue to strengthen our execution and our guest satisfaction metrics confirm that our restaurant teams are doing a great job delivering exceptional guest experience in this challenging environment.
Third, we continue to deploy technology to improve the guest experience.
Our brands benefit from the technology platform Darden provides, allowing each of them to compete more effectively by harnessing the power of our digital tools, including the 25 million email addresses in our marketing database.
During the quarter, Olive Garden LongHorn Steakhouse launched refresh websites and all our brands continue to use their digital storefronts effectively.
More than 55% of our off-premise sales during the quarter were fully digital transactions where guest ordered and paid online.
And at Olive Garden, 20% of our total sales for the quarter were digital.
During the quarter, we also rolled out Curbside I'm Here, which allows our guests to easily notify the restaurant that they've arrived to pick up their curbside to-go order by simply tapping on a link embedded in a text message.
As a result, our operators are spending less time on the phone and more time focused on ensuring orders are accurate and on-time, which is leading to improved guest satisfaction scores.
We also introduced Wait List Visibility, allowing guest to see their place on the waiting list using their phone regardless of whether they've checked in online or in person.
And we're working on several other initiatives, including streamlining our online checkout process and adding additional mobile payment options to provide even more convenience for our guest.
We continue to accelerate our digital journey, and I'm encouraged by the progress we are making.
Finally, we continue to vie...
...ends reversed.
As of today, we have approximately 77% of our restaurants operating with at least partial dining room capacity versus a peak of 97% in the middle of the second quarter.
Moving forward, we may experience further dining room closures and increasing capacity restrictions in the third quarter.
As you may recall, in our last earnings call, we mentioned that the third quarter is historically our peak seasonal sales quarter, driven by the Christmas, New Year's and Valentine's Day holidays as well as travel time during this time of year.
At that time, we also stated that it will be more difficult to increase on-premise average unit volumes if capacity restrictions do not ease.
Current dining room closures, capacity restrictions and reductions in travel will exacerbate our same-restaurant sales comparison to last year due to the higher sales -- seasonal sales from last year.
Additionally, there are still uncertainties surrounding further capacity limitations and dining room closures and the duration of these impacts.
Given all these factors, we are providing a broad range of expectations for the third quarter.
We expect total sales to be between 65% and 70% of prior year levels, resulting in total sales of between $1.53 billion and $1.65 billion, EBITDA between $170 million and $210 million and diluted net earnings per share from continuing operations between $0.50 and $0.75 on a diluted share base of 132 million shares.
With dining rooms closures increasing, we are focusing on our playbook of expense management and off-premise sales.
While there is encouraging news on the broad distribution of COVID-19 vaccine in the spring, we currently don't anticipate meaningful sales trend improvements until some time in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021.
Despite the short-term headwinds we faced with sales trends, operational complexity and impacts to our team members, I'm confident we are making the right decisions for the long-term to create a better guest experience and strengthen our business.
And consistent with our messaging last quarter, we continue to believe we can achieve 100% of our pre-COVID EBITDA dollars at approximately 90% of pre-COVID EBITDA -- pre-COVID sales, while continuing to make appropriate investments in our business.
Rick's career represents what our industry is all about.
He joined Darden as a Buster at Red Lobster 1984 and has worked extremely hard mastering many functions.
On January 4, he will become the President of the world's largest full service restaurant company.
He's been a great partner to me over the last five years, and I look forward to working side-by-side with him in his new role.
Additionally, we announced that Raj Vennam will become our Chief Financial Officer.
Raj began his career at Darden in 2003, and has done an exceptional job in every role he has held.
His promotion recognizes the significant contributions he has made to our individual brands as well as the greater organization.
With a brilliant mind and a keen understanding of our industry, Raj is the perfect person to take over for Rick.
I'm excited to see him expand his role in the company as CFO.
Rick and Raj are here with me in the room today, and I want to take this opportunity to congratulate both of them.
I want to close by recognizing our team members in the restaurants and at the support center.
I can't say enough about the dedication they've demonstrated throughout the year.
Their focus, commitment and determination is exceptional.
With multiple jurisdictions implementing dining room closures, we know many team members will not get the hours they needed during this holiday season.
That is why we have reintroduced our emergency pay program that will provide three weeks of emergency pay to team members who are furloughed from their restaurant when dining rooms are closed.
Our [Technical Issue] our greatest competitive advantage, and we are committed to taking care of them.
I wish you all a safe and a happy holiday season.
