During the call, we will discuss our results for the fourth quarter and fiscal 2021 as well as our outlook for fiscal 2022.
In addition, a slide deck providing detailed financial results for the quarter is also posted on our website.
Despite operating in what remains an incredibly volatile environment, we delivered on our previously provided 2021 outlook for net sales, synergies, adjusted earnings per share and adjusted EBITDA.
2021 was our sixth consecutive year of organic revenue growth behind elevated demand and distribution gains.
This top line growth, combined with synergies we achieved from the Spectrum acquisition and interest expense savings translated into strong adjusted earnings per share and EBITDA growth.
In a few moments John will provide details on the fourth quarter and full year.
However, before he does some key headlines from our fiscal 2021 performance.
For the first time our Company exceeded $3 billion in net sales.
We also maintained top line momentum with organic sales growth of 7.3% including growth of nearly 17% in our auto care business.
Our battery and auto care businesses benefited from elevated demand and distribution gains in North America.
Auto care further benefited from the expansion in our international markets, reaching $100 million in sales in those markets for the full year.
We also delivered synergies of $62 million for the year, resulting in total synergies from the Spectrum acquisition in excess of $130 million, 30% higher than our initial estimate.
And we continue to invest in our brands, resulting in strong brand preference globally.
With more consumers selecting our battery brand, we gained 2.2 share point in the last 12 months.
This performance is a tribute to our team and their resiliency.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, we have consistently adapted in real-time to ensure business continuity and repositioned Energizer for the future.
The hard work of our global colleagues to produce and deliver products to our customers and consumers in a time of heightened demand and significant disruption has been impressive to witness on a daily basis.
In a moment, I will provide headlines for our 2022 outlook.
However, before I do I want to provide an update on a few key topics that will set the stage for the future.
First, our categories remain healthy and are showing solid growth when compared to pre-pandemic levels and we expect the consumer behaviors supporting that demand will continue for the foreseeable future.
Specifically in batteries, there are two drivers.
Devices owned per household are up mid single digits in the US and an increase in the amount of time those devices are being used.
Consequently, consumers are using more batteries, which has resulted in new buying patterns versus a year ago, including increased purchase frequency and spending per trip.
As a result, on a two-year stack basis without e-commerce, the global battery category has grown by 2.9% in value and 3.7% in volume.
In the near term, we will see the category decline as it did in the three months ending August 2021 where it was down 6.9% in value and 5.3% in volume due to comping elevated demand from a year ago.
However, as we look to the long term, we anticipate the category to experience flat to low single-digit growth, albeit on a higher base as the category has increased in size due to consumers' behavior during the pandemic.
Within the category, our iconic brands remain well positioned.
Our brands outpaced the category, resulting in a 2.2 share point gain versus last year as we increased distribution in the US and internationally with share gains in those markets representing 70% of our total battery revenues.
Turning to the auto care category.
Over the last five years the auto care category has shown consistent growth, a trend that continued in the latest 13 weeks with category value up 3.5% versus year ago and 16.3% versus 2019.
The growth is being driven by consumers continuing the do-it-yourself behavio...
...ear quarter as we are benefiting from significant refinancing activity over the past 18 months.
During the fourth quarter, we entered into a $75 million accelerated share repurchase program.
Approximately 1.5 million shares were delivered in fiscal 2021 and we expect another 400,000 shares to be delivered in the first quarter of fiscal '22, bringing the total number of shares repurchased under the ASR program to approximately 1.9 million.
Now turning to the highlights for fiscal 2021.
As Mark mentioned, we delivered our full-year 2021 outlook for revenue, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EPS.
Net sales grew 10.1%, including organic sales up 7.3% as we experienced robust growth in both the Americas and International and across all three product categories, batteries, auto care and lighting products.
Adjusted gross margin was down 100 basis points, as higher input costs were partially offset by synergies and the reduction of COVID-related costs incurred in 2020.
Interest expense, benefiting from significant refinancing activity, decreased $33 million.
Adjusted earnings per share increased 51% to $3.48 as higher sales, synergies and lower interest expense more than offset the higher input costs.
And adjusted EBITDA increased 10%.
At the end of 2021, our net debt was approximately $3.2 billion or 5.1 times net debt to credit defined EBITDA with nearly 85% at fixed interest rates, no near-term maturities and an all-in cost of debt below 4%.
Our adjusted free cash flow for 2021 was $203.5 million.
The decline versus the prior year primarily reflects working capital investments as we proactively invested in incremental inventory given the continued volatility in the global supply network and uncertainty around product sourcing, transportation and labor availability.
Now turning to our fiscal 2022 outlook.
As Mark discussed, our categories remain healthy and are showing solid growth when compared to pre-pandemic levels.
As we enter fiscal 2022, we are benefiting from significant pricing actions.
However, input costs continue to rise.
The outlook we are providing for next year reflects pricing actions that we have executed or planned as well as the assumption that our input costs remain at current levels for the full year.
Organic revenue is expected to be roughly flat with auto care growth and pricing actions across 85% of our businesses, offset by declines in battery as we comp prior year elevated demand in the first two fiscal quarters.
We also expect reported revenue will be negatively impacted by foreign currency headwinds of $20 million to $25 million at current rates.
As we have talked about for the last couple of quarters, input costs including raw materials, labor and transportation costs, are rising rapidly and supply chain networks continue to be stressed.
Last quarter I highlighted the potential for an additional 100 basis points of gross margin headwinds in 2022 if input costs did not improve.
And as of today, the trends have worsened.
While we expect the absolute dollar amount of these rising costs to be offset by the pricing actions and cost reduction efforts that our team has undertaken, we now project gross margin headwinds of approximately 150 basis points, based on current rates and assumptions.
These inflationary cost pressures, combined with the anticipated volume declines in battery in the first half of the year, are expected to result in adjusted earnings per share in the range of $3 to $3.30 and adjusted EBITDA in the range of $560 million to $590 million.
As we look at our capital allocation priorities during this volatile macro environment, we will continue to invest in our businesses and brands for the long term while returning cash to shareholders and paying down debt.
While 2021 was a solid year for Energizer and one that we are proud of, our focus today is on moving forward and working to further mitigate the cost headwinds we are facing while ensuring our products are available to consumers around the world.
