There is an inherent risk that actual results and experience could differ materially.
You can find a discussion of our risk factors, which could potentially contribute to such differences, in our Form 10-K filed earlier today.
My first two official months back at Fluor have been extremely busy.
The immediate priority was to reset and communicate our longer-term strategy and the corresponding organizational structure.
As you know, we announced the new Fluor management team in January.
Our collective focus is on the end markets where we have the right technical expertise to add value for our clients, while earning a suitable return for our shareholders.
The recent changes that have been implemented align our business around the strategic priorities identified for Fluor in the near term.
As a reminder, our four strategic priorities are to: number one, drive growth across the portfolio; two, pursue contracts with fair and balanced terms; three, foster a high-performance culture with purpose; and four, reinforce financial discipline.
For a longer-term view of Fluor's opportunities and key focus areas, please tune in to our Strategy Day from last month if you haven't had a chance to view it yet.
Strategy Day kicked off one of the more exciting eras of change and growth in Fluor's long history.
And we are confident that the strategic plan as outlined will deliver a directional earnings range between $3 and $3.50 per share by 2024.
We ended the year with a backlog of $25.6 billion and full year new awards of $9 billion.
New awards clearly reflected the impact of the pandemic and its pressure on our clients.
They also reflect our stringent pursuit criteria and strategy to reduce risk.
Across our end markets, we saw clients delay capital spending plans while they waited for uncertainty from the pandemic to subside.
Based on conversations with our clients, we are starting to see positive momentum and expect to see new awards pick up in the second half of 2021.
We continue to see good prospects across our portfolio and are completing front-end work scopes to populate our future backlog.
However, lower awards in 2020 will create a headwind for 2021 earnings.
Before talking about what we are seeing for 2021, I want to reinforce that the people of Fluor have tackled the challenges of 2020 with a resilience and energy that was unmatched.
These challenges have made us all more adaptive, and I believe that the organization is truly motivated to successfully take the company forward into its next chapter.
Now let's turn to our business lines and how we are aligning our priorities with the opportunities ahead.
Turning to Slide 4.
As we move into 2021, our urban solutions end markets are gaining momentum, specifically, in mining.
We are seeing high demand for metals such as copper and iron ore.
Last year, we booked a significant North American steel project as well as several front-end studies that we expect will convert to follow-on EPCM awards in late 2021 and beyond.
Late last year, we achieved patent completion for the BHP Spence copper project in Chile.
We've had a long-term relationship supporting BHP's capital efforts, and we are proud to be completing another successful project for them.
We are also encouraged by the opportunities we are seeing in our advanced technologies and life sciences end markets.
Here, we are pursuing data centers and semiconductor opportunities in North America and major life sciences prospects in Europe.
In addition, Fluor has just been selected for a large biotech project in Europe, and we are finalizing contract details now.
This confirms our strategy to leverage front-end technical solutions into full EPC awards.
Contract signature is expected by the end of Q1 2021, and we look forward to sharing more specifics at that time.
Advanced technologies and life sciences is well positioned to support our clients for advanced manufacturing projects.
This includes opportunities arising from the U.S. government's executi...
...ditional $100 million of annual savings over the next three years as we rationalize overhead to the new shape of our business.
During the fourth quarter, we exited two of our European infrastructure P3 investments and received cash of approximately $20 million.
We also have two North American joint ventures that we expect to exit later in 2021.
Moving to Slide 11.
Our ending cash balance was $2.2 billion, up from 2019.
Domestic available cash represented 32% of this total.
We expect to see our cash holding steady around $2 billion through the year, with debt retirement being offset by divestitures and the liquidity improvement measures we have discussed in the past.
Operating cash flow for the full year was $186 million, which included approximately $375 million of cash to fund our legacy projects.
Additionally, our debt-to-capitalization requirement on this amendment facility was expanded to 0.65 times, which gives us more flexibility in current borrowing capacity as we assess our capital needs moving forward.
We believe this is the appropriate size facility we need to support our business given the shift in our strategy as well as another good example of our efforts we are making around the organization to make Fluor fit for purpose.
In 2020, we continued the process of monetizing our investment in AMECO, an equipment rental business; earlier in the year, we sold our operations in Jamaica, closed our operations in Mexico and sold the equipment rental business owned by Stork.
We announced on our Strategy Day call that we have received a letter of intent for our AMECO North America business and are now reviewing options for the remaining South America business.
Our two main financial priorities in 2021 are further stabilizing our capital structure, which we plan to primarily do with debt retirement and divestitures, and booking a pipeline of work that fits our revised pursuit criteria and our strategies.
We are introducing our 2021 adjusted earnings per share guidance of $0.50 to $0.80 per diluted share for continuing operations.
This excludes NuScale-related expenses and any impact from foreign currency gains or losses, restructuring or impairments.
This also reflects Stork being a discontinued operation.
As David said, we expect to see new awards begin to pick up in the back half of 2021 with significant earnings per share growth in 2022 as we begin to work these projects.
Though we do not give quarterly guidance, Q1 results have historically reflected higher G&A expenses.
While we are seeing green shoots around the business, the lingering effects of the pandemic will continue to keep awards depressed for the next few months.
Furthermore, our existing backlog is still being impacted by the pandemic.
Though our projects are back online for the most part, government restrictions have slowed down our progress and the rate at which we are able to grow our clients.
Turning to Slide 13.
Our assumptions for 2021 include: a slight decline in revenue as compared to 2020, adjusted G&A expense of approximately $40 million to $50 million per quarter and a tax rate of approximately 28%.
We anticipate average full year margins of 2% to 3% in Urban Solutions, 2.5% to 3% in Mission Solutions and margins of 2.5% to 3.5% in Energy Solutions and improving as the year progresses.
These margins include the remaining impact of zero-margin work flowing through the business.
We also anticipate 2021 capital expenditures to be below $100 million as we divest our AMECO business this year.
As David reaffirmed, we maintain our long-term guidance of $3 to $3.50 of earnings per share by 2024.
We are taking the necessary first steps by strengthening our balance sheet and focusing our growth on end markets where we see the best opportunities for revenue and margin expansion.
With the COVID headwinds starting to subside, we will see a resumption of project awards to drive our profits over the next several years.
Operator, we're ready for our first question.
