Our speakers are Jim Owens, H.B. Fuller President and Chief Executive Officer; and John Corkrean, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer.
First, a reminder that our comments today will include references to organic revenue, which excludes the impact of foreign currency translation on our revenues.
We believe that discussion of these measures is useful to investors to assist their understanding of our operating performance and how our results compare with other companies.
Unless otherwise specified, discussion of sales and revenue refers to organic revenues and discussion of EPS, margins or EBITDA refers to adjusted non-GAAP measures.
Many of these risks and uncertainties are and will be exacerbated by COVID-19 and resulting deterioration of the global business and economic environment.
Last evening, we reported first quarter results, which built upon the momentum we saw in Q4 of last year.
Organic revenues this quarter were up 10.5%, adjusted EBITDA was up 30% and adjusted earnings per share of $0.66 was nearly doubled last year's first quarter.
The H.B. Fuller team gained share and reduced operating expense in each of our businesses in 2020, which created the momentum that is delivering exceptional financial performance to begin fiscal 2021.
Market innovation and exceptional service led to the share gains as H.B. Fuller solved customer problems faster than competition and growth accelerated as demand continued to strengthen in the first quarter.
As we reported last March, COVID-19 impacted our fiscal Q1 of 2020 only in China and by about $15 million in revenue, $4.5 million in EBITDA and $0.06 of EPS.
Excluding this impact, our revenues were up 8% organically, EBITDA was up 23% and earnings per share was up 65%, exceptional results.
H.B. Fuller works with our customers to solve their toughest adhesive problems.
In today's remote work environment, this means collaborating in new ways and delivering market-driven innovation faster than ever.
For example, we proactively developed and qualified new engineering adhesives for mobile devices, automotive, electronics, electronic vehicle batteries and solar panels to name just a few.
These innovations helped drive one of our strongest quarters for engineering adhesive sales growth.
We created technology and branding opportunities with the new line of GorillaPro MRO adhesives and there will be more H.B. Fuller marketing innovation in the year ahead.
We work with Hygiene, Health and Consumable customers to develop innovative applications and to ensure supply to meet high demand for their products.
As a result, we substantially grew our sales across the majority of our HHC end markets in the first quarter.
H.B. Fuller's revenue growth was also broad based geographically in the quarter with organic growth in all three of our geographic regions.
Importantly, our growth came with positive incremental margins driven by product mix, reduced expenses and structural efficiencies resulting from our business realignment last year.
EBITDA margin increased 190 basis points year-on-year.
Raw material cost increased from where we exited 2020, but we're still relatively neutral on a year-over-year basis in the first quarter and in line with our expectations.
Raw material cost going forward will increase at a faster rate than originally anticipated due to increased demand, reduced inventories and supply constraint.
Winter storm Uri in the Gulf Coast in February has created additional tightening in the United States and is impacting global supply.
Supply has become tight for commodity materials, which make up a smaller portion of our portfolio.
As the year progresses, this will also have an impact on the supply and pricing of the specialty materials, which make up the majority of our purchases.
Most suppliers have made good progress in recovering from Uri.
However, the rate of recovery going forward will mostly depend on the output rates of the impacted assets and the time it takes for sup...
...llion in the quarter compared to $6 million during the same period last year.
Regarding our outlook, based on what we know today and the planning assumptions that Jim laid out earlier, we anticipate revenue to be up high single-digits to low double-digits versus 2020 and EBITDA to be between $455 million and $475 million as continued strong volume growth and pricing actions offset higher raw material costs.
We expect cash flow to be strong for the rest of the year, allowing us to maintain our target to pay down approximately $200 million of debt during 2021.
We were very pleased with our strong start in the first quarter, which follows a strong fourth quarter, both of which greatly outperformed predominantly non-COVID quarters from the prior year.
We are growing through our strategy of delivering sustainable innovation and high value solutions and we are in a great position to continue to grow our business as global economies continue to open up in 2021.
This year, we will focus on three critical priorities to profitably grow our business in a dynamic environment.
Our top priority is to drive continued volume growth as we support our customers success in the current high demand and supply constrained environment.
This means continued growth through innovation, leverage of remote servicing tools as a new standard and finding creative ways to address any raw material shortages we see in the coming months.
Our second imperative is to strategically manage pricing aligned to the value we deliver in this inflationary environment.
Our company has built pricing tools and in-depth training in anticipation of the day when material inflation returned.
And we are already executing with speed and precision to maintain and grow our business while pricing to value.
Our third priority, to help fuel our growth will be to release productive capacity through our operational excellence programs.
Our 2020 operations investment was centered on creating the operational discipline and metrics that enable more productivity per employee work hour.
In a low capital-intensive business like ours, this helps to reduce cost and increase capacity.
We will also deliver an additional $200 million of debt reduction in 2021, moving the company closer to our net debt target of 2 to 3 times EBITDA.
On our conference call a year ago in March of 2020, I told you that because of our extraordinary collaboration with customers, a robust global operations and supply chain and our unmatched expertise and adhesive innovation, I was confident that H.B. Fuller which strengthened its position in this industry, setting ourselves apart from competition and enabling us to grow as global economies recover.
I was confident that we would emerge as an even stronger company than prior to the pandemic.
Our stronger performance throughout 2020 and our exceptional results in the first quarter are proof that my confidence was well founded.
This company is built on an agile business model where people collaborate remotely with each other, with customers and with suppliers around the globe.
In a changing world, these attributes of agility, collaboration and flexibility have enabled H.B. Fuller to excel.
As working conditions changed, supply and demand fluctuated and as supply constraints emerged, the H.B. Fuller team has been first and fastest among adhesive companies at addressing challenges.
Growing the business this year in a period of economic recovery presents exciting opportunities and unique challenges.
In 2021, our business priorities are squarely focused on capturing share and managing inflation risks as we continue to build on our rising leadership position in the global adhesives industry.
Our culture of collaboration and innovation and our improving operational execution gives me confidence that we are strongly positioned to continue to deliver sustained value for our shareholders in 2021 and in the years ahead.
Operator, please open up the call so we can take some questions.
