I am joined with our Chairman and CEO, Scott Santi and Senior Vice President and CFO, Michael Larsen.
During today's call, we will discuss fourth quarter and full year 2019 financial results and provide guidance for full year 2020.
Finally, I'd like to remind folks, we have our Investor Day coming up six weeks from today on March 13 in Fort Worth, Texas.
The ITW team delivered another quarter of solid operational execution and strong financial performance in Q4.
Despite some broad-based macro challenges, we delivered GAAP earnings per share growth of 9%, operating margin of 23.7% and after-tax return on invested capital of 28.9% in the quarter.
For the full year, against the backdrop of an industrial demand environment that went from decelerating in the first half of the year to contracting in the second half of the year, we're continuing to execute well on the things within our control.
As a result, despite revenues that were down $700 million or 4.5% year-on-year, we delivered record GAAP earnings per share of $7.74, expanded operating margin to 24.4% excluding higher restructuring expenses and group free cash flow by 9%.
In addition, we were able to raise our dividend by 7% and returned $2.8 billion to shareholders in the form of dividends and share repurchases.
Equally important, in 2019, we continued to make solid progress on our path to ITW's full potential performance through the execution of our enterprise strategy.
Last year, we invested more than $600 million to support the execution of our strategy and further enhanced the growth and profitability performance of our core businesses.
In addition, each of our divisions continued to make progress in executing well-defined and focused plans to achieve full potential performance in their respective businesses.
We look forward to providing a full progress update on our enterprise strategy and our progress toward ITW's full potential performance at our Investor Day in March.
Looking ahead, ITW's powerful and proprietary business model, diversified high quality business portfolio and dedicated team of highly skilled ITW colleagues around the world position us well to continue to deliver differentiated performance across a range of economic scenarios in 2020 and beyond.
In the fourth quarter, organic revenue declined 1.6% year-over-year in what remains a pretty challenging demand environment.
The strike at GM reduced our enterprise organic growth rate by approximately 50 basis points and Product Line Simplification was 60 basis points in the quarter.
By geography, North America was down 2% and international was down 1%.
Europe declined 1%, while Asia Pacific was flat.
Organic growth in China was broad-based across our portfolio and up 7% year-over-year.
As expected, our execution on the elements within our control remained strong in the fourth quarter.
Operating margin was 23.7%, including 40 basis points of unfavorable margin impact from higher restructuring expenses year-over-year.
Excluding those higher expenses, operating margin was up 10 basis points to 24.1%.
Enterprise initiatives contributed 130 basis points and price/cost was positive 30 basis points.
GAAP earnings per share was up 9% to $1.99 and included an $0.11 gain from three divestitures and $0.06 headwind from higher restructuring expenses year-over-year and foreign currency translation impact.
The effective tax rate in the quarter was 22.8%.
Free cash flow was 114% of net income.
And as planned, we repurchased $375 million of our own shares during the quarter.
Overall, Q4 was another quarter characterized by strong operational execution and resilient financial performance in a pretty challenging demand environment.
Let's move to Slide 4 and operating margin.
Overall, operating margin of 23.7% was down 30 basis points year-over-year, primarily due to higher restructuring expense.
Excluding those higher restructuring expenses, margin improved 10 basis points despite a 3% decline in revenues.
Enterprise initiat...
...n sales, the plan is to offset any earnings per share dilution with incremental share repurchases.
In the fourth quarter, we completed the sale of three businesses with combined 2019 revenues of approximately $135 million, generating a pre-tax gain on sale of $50 million or $0.11 a share.
In 2019, these businesses were a 20 basis points drag to our organic growth rate and 10 basis points to our margin rate.
On Slide 10, we wanted to give you a quick update on the progress that we're making on our organic growth initiatives.
We estimated the aggregate market growth rate or decline for each one of our segments and compared it to the segments actual organic growth rate in 2019.
We also included Product Line Simplification by segment.
As you know, full potential steady state PLS is expected to be about 30 basis points.
As you can see overall, we've made some good progress, as our segments are all outgrowing their underlying markets, except for Specialty Products.
At the enterprise level, we estimate that we outpaced our aggregate blended market growth rates by approximately one percentage point.
So overall good progress on our organic growth initiatives.
And by completing our Finish the Job agenda over the next several years, we expect to generate one to two percentage points of additional improvement in ITW's organic growth rate.
As Scott mentioned, we look forward to providing a full progress update at our Investor Day in March.
Now let's talk -- let's turn the page and talk about 2020, starting with Slide 11.
First, we expect GAAP earnings per share in the range of $7.65 to $8.05 for 2020.
Using current levels of demand adjusted for seasonality, organic growth at the enterprise level is forecast to be in the range of 0% to 2% for the year.
At current exchange rates, foreign currency translation impact and the revenue associated with our 2019 divestitures are each of -- one percentage point headwind to revenue.
PLS impact is expected to be approximately 50 basis points.
We expect to expand operating margin from 24.1% in 2019 to a range of 24.5% to 25% in 2020 with enterprise initiatives contributing approximately 100 basis points.
After-tax ROIC should improve to a range of 29% to 30%.
And as usual, we expect strong free cash flow with conversion greater than net income.
We have allocated $2 billion to share repurchases with core share repurchases of $1.5 billion, an additional $500 million to offset the earnings per share dilution from the three completed divestitures.
Additional items include an expected tax rate in the range of 23.5% to 24.5%, which represents a 10% -- $0.10 earnings per share headwind and foreign currency at today's rates is also unfavorable $0.10 of EPS.
Just a quick word as it relates to the Coronavirus situation in China and we're obviously in the same position as everyone else.
At this point, we've baked into our guidance a last week of production, assuming that we all return to work in China on February 10.
But obviously it's too early to tell and we'll continue to monitor the situation closely.
Overall, ITW is well positioned for differentiated financial performance across a wide range of scenarios as we continue to execute on the things within our control and make meaningful progress on our path to full potential performance through the implementation of our Finish the Job enterprise strategy agenda.
Finally, we're providing an organic growth outlook by segment for full year 2020 on Slide 12.
And as always, these are based on current run rates adjusted for seasonality and are obviously influenced by year-over-year comparisons as we go through the year.
It's important to note that there is no expectation of demand acceleration embedded in our guidance.
You can see that every segment is forecast to improve the organic growth rate in 2020 relative to 2019.
The same is true for margins, as every segment expects to improve the margin performance in 2020.
Julianne, we're ready to open up the lines for Q&A.
