Today we will be reviewing our third quarter 2020 financial result, and providing investors with an update on our transformation and our response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Further information can be found in our SEC filing.
Through their persistence and hard work, we successfully balanced lower sales by making durable changes to minimize cost.
We found innovative ways to engage with our customers and we kept our transformation plans on schedule.
We also overcame unprecedented global supply chain constraints, which was also challenging and improved tremendously since the early stages of the pandemic.
In addition, our pipeline of new products continues unabated with products that deliver innovative clinical solutions that are expected to drive incremental sales growth.
Taken all together, these actions should result in long-term improvements to our business since a public company forward it depend on its result.
We're pleased with our performance in the third quarter, achieving our 12th consecutive quarter of year-over-year improvement in adjusted EBITDA.
As guided, we delivered higher consolidated sequential net sales, driven by a double-digit increase in Europe as a result of the initial easing of public healthcare restrictions, primarily in France and Germany, with the U.K. still remaining fairly closed.
We continue to monitor our key markets and the potential impact on our business and believe we're prepared for the pandemic to sporadically recur during the winter months.
In North America, we saw a continued strength in respiratory products, offsetting diluted sales in mobility and seating products due to its longer quote order cycle, which we'll cover in more detail on later slides.
On the balance sheet, we retired a significant majority of the 2021 convertible notes, leaving just over $1 million maturing in February of next year.
Finally, our strong performance in the third quarter and our visibility into trends during the fourth quarter give us the confidence to raise our full year guidance for net sales and adjusted EBITDA.
Turning to Slide four.
In the third quarter, we delivered stronger operating income, both year-over-year and sequentially, continuing our track record of enhancing profitability.
Additionally, adjusted EBITDA improved year-over-year and grew nearly 50% sequentially, driven by higher net sales and lower SG&A expenses.
I'm pleased with our strong performance in this challenging environment, which demonstrates that our prior transformation initiatives are successfully driving improved results in line with expectations.
Turning to Slide five.
This is a chart we found helpful to depict the impact of the pandemic on our product lines over the past few quarters.
As expected, we continue to see above normal demand for our respiratory products, specifically stationary oxygen concentrators, which are used as an essential part of COVID-19 care.
With 95% of our sales in Northern Hemisphere, we anticipate continued elevated demand as winter weather forces more people indoors with pandemic blues occurring as a result.
In our lifestyle category, we returned to more normal sales levels, having passed peak surge demand for bed and related products for pandemic care.
Product mix shifted toward at-home care away from normally higher levels of institutional sales that have been lower due to limited access to long-term care facilities and lower admissions of new residents.
In mobility and seating, we saw a general recovery in demand more immediately in Europe, which went from very strict measures to more normal healthcare access.
As a result, reported net sales in Europe improved over 38% sequentially, although still lower than third quarter 2019.
We saw a similar type of recovery in North America in the form of higher quote volumes in the third quarter, which we anticipate will lead to increase sales through the end of the year.
Globally, we continue to launch an exciting full line of new products in all categories that ...
...ility and seating products increased 0.2%.
We believe that demand for mobility and seating products are largely nonperishable, as evidenced by significant higher quotes in the third quarter, which are expected to convert into stronger sales for the remainder of the year.
Gross profit increased 170 basis points or $2.6 million, driven by higher net sales and lower material and freight costs from prior transformation initiatives, partially offset by unfavorable variances and higher warranty expense.
Operating income was $3 million, an improvement of $4.7 million, driven primarily by actions which lowered SG&A expense.
Turning to Slide 13, all other, which includes the sales of the Asia-Pacific region, decreased by 3.1% on a constant currency basis, driven by lower sales of mobility and seating products, partially offset by higher sale of lifestyle products.
Operating loss increased by $500,000 due to lower operating profit as a result of the dynamic control divestiture in the first quarter 2020 and improved $1.6 million sequentially, primarily driven by lower stock compensation expense.
Moving to Slide 14.
As of September 30, 2020, the company had total debt of $273 million, excluding operating and finance lease obligations.
As of September 30, 2020, the company had $87 million of cash on its balance sheet, which was sequentially lower, primarily as a result of proactively repurchasing $24.5 million of convertible notes in the third quarter.
We are pleased to have retired the significant majority of these notes, which increased our financial flexibility, reduced ongoing interest expense and leave a balance of less than $1.3 million maturing in February of 2021.
We remain confident that our balance sheet will support us through the transformation.
And as always, we continue to assess opportunities to further optimize our capital structure.
Turning to Slide 15.
As a result of the sequential improvement in business performance achieved in the third quarter and our visibility into the fourth quarter, we are updating our full year guidance for 2020.
The company anticipates consolidated net sales to improve sequentially in the fourth quarter 2020, but remain lower than the fourth quarter last year based on continuing access to healthcare facilities without new public health restrictions and from the adoption of new products.
While the markets are expected to continue to remain open, pandemic-related closures may vary in regions over the winter months.
For the full year 2020, the company now expects reported net sales of at least $840 million, up from the previous range of $810 million to $840 million, driven by the expected recovery of sales based on the recent trends we've seen in the early part of the fourth quarter.
Adjusted EBITDA in the range of $28 million to $32 million, up from the previous range of $27 million to $30 million due to the benefit of prior transformation actions and our continued ability to optimize cost.
And free cash flow usage in the range of $8 million to $12 million, changed from the previous range of 7% to 10%, given the timing of the recognition of sales during the fourth quarter delaying the collection of cash into the first quarter of 2021.
So far, 2020 has been a year like no other.
It's impossible to overuse the word unprecedented as the pandemic has impacted almost every aspect of our daily lives, yet while we were still able to achieve year-over-year improvement in our operating results despite those continuing challenges.
Over the company's recent history, we faced adversity and we've always been up to the task.
Our transformation initiatives will drive our return to profitability and create a stronger, more agile organization, which will unlock further shareholder value.
We're already seeing the results of the diligent work.
We know there's plenty more progress to be made ahead of these challenges.
I believe it's even stronger, and I'm confident in our continued progress.
We'll now take questions.
