First, on a somber note, as we look at the events over the last couple of weeks, our thoughts, Korn Ferry's thoughts, are with the people of Ukraine and everyone who's been impacted by the destruction, the devastation, and the loss of thousands of lives.
Our prayers go out to all of those who were impacted by this unnecessary war and by the human misery that's taking place.
Turning from that, and an entirely different view, I am pleased with our results during the third quarter.
We once again achieved new financial performance size.
We generated about $681 million in fee revenue, that was up 43% year over year.
Our diluted and adjusted diluted earnings per share was $1.54 and $1.59, respectively, and those were also new highs.
Our performance over the recent quarters is a reflection of the relevance of our strategy and solutions, the resilience of our colleagues, and more importantly, the connection with our Korn Ferry brand.
We're replicating and scaling our success and continuing to lead innovation at the intersection of talent and strategy in an increasingly digitally enabled new world of work.
The metrics of our business are very good.
It's hard to believe that it was two years ago, almost to the day that the pandemic was declared.
And those were certainly uncertain times.
And now again, we face ourselves with uncertain times.
But when we think about the power of the firm, the breadth of what we offer, and particularly the sacrifices made by our colleagues over the last couple of years, it affirms what this company is all about.
We've accelerated from that uncertainty.
We're now up 32% compared to the quarter preceding the pandemic, which at that time was an all-time high, and we haven't just talked about it we've walked it.
We've walked it from the vast IP we have.
We developed over 1 million professionals a year.
We walked it by living our purpose, and we continue to innovate, replicate and scale, allowing people and organizations to exceed their potential in this rapidly changing world.
Elements of our strategy include driving a top-down go-to-market approach based on our marquee and regional accounts, which year to date represent about 37% of our portfolio.
This not only facilitates growth and enduring partnerships, but is also key to more scalable and durable revenues.
For example, on a year-to-date basis, about 28% of our revenue is driven by cross referrals within our firm, up several million dollars sequentially which demonstrates the effectiveness of our go-to-market strategy.
We also believe there's substantial market opportunity with our talent acquisition and interim businesses, particularly given the acceleration of the nomadic labor market.
And looking at our digital and consulting businesses, we'll continue to innovate, marrying Korn Ferry's capabilities with tomorrow's opportunities, from organizational transformation, to sales effectiveness and accelerated revenue growth to M&A and ESG.
We're going to continue to further push to monetize our IP and continue to move more of our digital business to a subscription offering.
And we're also going to scale our learning, development, outsourcing capabilities, LDO, leveraging our Korn Ferry Advance platform.
150,000 professionals around the world have used Advance, both as individuals and as part of their professional development journeys with their employers.
And lastly, we're going to maintain a balanced capital allocation strategy.
including a disciplined approach to M&A.
With that, I'm joined by Gregg Kvochak and Bob Rozek.
A couple of weeks ago, I celebrated my 10-year anniversary at Korn Ferry.
Looking back to when I started, I really believed that there were great opportunities ahead for us.
And as I stand here today, after 10 years, looking at the business we built, the data, the assets, the solutions, and most of all, the incredibly talented colleagues we have to serve our clients, it's pretty clear to me that I underestimated our true potential.
The inve...
...evenue grew to $188.6 million, which was up 98% year over year and up approximately $38 million or 25% sequentially.
RPO fee revenue grew approximately 68% year over year and 3% sequentially, while professional search revenue was up approximately 150% year over year, and up 67% sequentially.
The integration of the Lucas Group has gone well.
Revenue in the third quarter for the Lucas Group was approximately $33 million, which was up approximately 10% compared to the revenue for the three months preceding the acquisition.
New business wins for both RPO and professional search were also strong in the third quarter, reaching new highs.
Professional search new business was $93 million and RPO was awarded $135 million of new contracts, consisting of $74 million of renewals and extensions and $61 million of new logo work.
Adjusted EBITDA for RPO and professional search continued to scale with revenue improving to $44.1 million with an adjusted EBITDA margin of 23.4%.
Finally, in the third quarter, global fee revenue for executive search reached another new high of $239 million, which was up 42% year over year.
Growth was also broad-based with North America growing 44% year over year and EMEA and APAC growing 32% and 45%, respectively.
Market demand in international regions continued to improve in the third quarter with core sequential growth accelerating in EMEA, APAC and Latin America.
We continue to invest in expanding our team of consultants in the third quarter.
The total number of dedicated executive search consultants worldwide at the end of the third quarter was 581, just up 59 year over year and up 11 sequentially.
Annualized fee revenue production per consultant in the third quarter remained steady at $1.66 million.
And the number of new search assignments opened worldwide in the third quarter was up 37% year over year to 1,787.
In the third quarter, global executive search adjusted EBITDA grew approximately $66 million, which was up 24 -- grew to approximately $66 million, which was up $24 million year over year with an adjusted EBITDA margin of 27.5%.
As previously discussed, our consolidated new business grew to a new high in the third quarter, again, with real strength across all lines of business.
Backlog exiting the third quarter was strong as was February new business.
February generally is the shortest month in the year in terms of working days.
However, this February was actually our eighth best new business month ever excluding RPO.
And if you include RPO, it was actually our best new business month ever.
Now despite the continuing strength in new business trends and backlog coming out of Q3, the very recent situation in Eastern Europe presents a level of risk and uncertainty that is difficult to quantify.
With this in mind and assuming no new major pandemic-related lockdowns or further changes in worldwide geopolitical conditions, economic conditions, financial markets or foreign exchange rates, we expect our consolidated fee revenue in the fourth quarter to range from $670 million to $690 million and our consolidated adjusted diluted earnings per share to range from $1.49 to $1.63 per share and our GAAP diluted earnings per share to range from $1.44 per share to $1.60.
Now let me end as I started.
As I look ahead for all the reasons previously discussed, I'm more optimistic now than I have ever been about our long-term opportunity to continue to build on our financial success.
Our company today has more durable revenue streams, has achieved a new level of business activity and profitability that is sustainable and has positioned us for continued growth.
And we have a core set of integrated solutions that are highly relevant to the mega trends that we're seeing in the world today.
Korn Ferry has never been better positioned to serve all of its constituencies, colleagues, clients, candidates, and shareholders for years to come.
With that, we'll conclude our remarks and be glad to answer any questions you may have.
