I'm here today with Chairman and CEO, Todd Bluedorn; and CFO, Joe Reitmeier.
Todd will review key points for the quarter and Joe will take you through the company's financial performance and outlook for 2021.
To give everyone time to ask questions during the Q&A, please limit yourself to a couple of questions or follow-ups and requeue for any additional questions.
All comparisons mentioned today are against the prior year period.
For information concerning these risks and uncertainties, see Lennox International's publicly available filings with the SEC.
In the first quarter, we continued to see strong momentum in our Residential business, combined with strong improvement in Commercial and Refrigeration, as the overall company set new first quarter highs for revenue, profit and earnings per share.
Overall, for the company, revenue was up 29% to a new first quarter record of $931 million.
At constant currency, revenue was up 28%.
GAAP operating income was a first quarter record $114 million, up 213%.
GAAP earnings per share from continuing operations was a first quarter record $2.20, up 588%.
Total segment profit rose 208% to a first quarter record of $116 million.
Total segment margin expanded 720 basis points to 12.4%, and adjusted points to 12.4%, and adjusted earnings per share from continuing operations rose 305% to a first quarter record $2.27.
Looking at our business segments for the first quarter, we've realized double digit revenue growth and margin expansion in all three businesses.
In Residential, we set new first quarter highs for revenue and profit.
Residential revenue was up 37%.
Segment profit rose 197% and segment margin expanded 850 basis points to 15.9%.
Replacement business was up more than 40% and new construction was up more than 25%.
Breaking it down between our Lennox business and our Allied business, Lennox revenue was up about 25%, and Allied was up about 70%.
Let me take a moment to unpack the strength we saw in Residential in the quarter.
First, with strong operational execution, our Residential team is capitalizing on its ability to deliver to meet contractor and distributor demand and gain share.
Post the 2018 tornado and the initial 2020 pandemic impact, we are back on offense with production, distribution and executing our playbook for market share gains.
Second, Residential benefited from the colder winter weather with heating degree days up 13% from the first quarter last year.
You may recall, we had a soft first quarter in 2020.
Third, I'd like to note that we had -- I would like to note that we had a 6% benefit to revenue for more days in the quarter this year than last year.
That happens every four years as we reset the calendar.
Conversely, the fourth quarter will have a 6% headwind from fewer days in the quarter this year.
This applies to Residential as well as all our other businesses.
Adjusting for the days, Residential grew 31% with Lennox growing nearly 20% and Allied growing about 65%.
In addition, for Allied, we had approximately $25 million of pull-forward in the first quarter from different distributor loading patterns this year than last year.
Adjusted for both days and this pull-forward, Allied was up approximately 35% in the quarter.
Working through all this math I gave, adjusting for days and the pull-forward in our Allied business which sells to independent distribution, overall Residential segment revenue was up about 25%.
We believe this compares to mid-teen sell-through for the industry, driven in part by the favorable cold weather that I talked about.
Our performance that is above that is due to market share gains.
As I mentioned earlier, we are back on the offensive with production, distribution and executing our playbook for gaining share.
The team has had strong operational execution to drive this outperformance, and we are well positioned for the summer season and our largest season of quarters.
In Commercial, revenue, segment profit and margin were all first quarter rec...
...t of revenue to 15.6% from 18.1% in the prior quarter.
In the first quarter, the company used $18 million in cash from operations compared to a usage of $99 million in the prior year quarter.
Capital expenditures were approximately 25 -- $24 million in the first quarter and in the prior year quarter.
Free cash flow was a negative $42 million in the first quarter compared to a negative $123 million in the prior quarter.
The company paid approximately $30 million in dividends in the quarter and repurchased $200 million of stock.
Total debt was $1.17 billion at the end of the first quarter and we ended the quarter with a debt-to-EBITDA ratio of 1.8.
Cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments were $40 million at the end of the first quarter.
We now expect the industry to see high single-digit shipment growth in Residential, Commercial Unitary and Refrigeration markets in full year, up from our prior assumption of mid-single-digit growth in these end markets.
For the company, we are raising guidance for 2021 revenue growth from a 48% range to a new range of 7% to 11%, and we still expect foreign exchange to be neutral to revenue for the full year.
We are raising guidance for 2021 GAAP earnings per share from continuing operations from a range of $10.55 to $11.15 to a new range of $11.33 to $11.93, and we are raising our 2021 adjusted earnings per share from continuing operations from $10.55 to $11.15 to a new range of $11.40 to $12.
Now let me run through the key points in our guidance assumptions and the puts and takes for 2021.
First, for the items that are changing.
We have announced a second round of price increases and now expect a benefit of $90 million in price for the year, up from our prior guidance of $50 million.
We now expect residential mix of $10 million, up from our prior guidance for neutral mix.
We expect a benefit of $15 million from sourcing and engineering-led cost reduction actions, down from our prior guidance of $25 million.
And this change reflects inflationary pressures from suppliers.
For commodities, we now expect a $55 million headwind, up from our prior guidance of $30 million.
Corporate expenses are now expected to be approximately $95 million, up from prior guidance of $90 million, primarily due to higher incentive compensation.
And now for the guidance items that remain the same.
We still expect a $20 million benefit from factory productivity.
With 30 new Lennox Stores planned for this year, we will be at a more normal run rate with distribution investments compared to last year.
Freight is still expected to be a $5 million headwind and tariffs are also expected to be a $5 million headwind.
We are planning for SG&A to be up approximately 7% for the year or a headwind of about $45 million.
Now within SG&A, we are making investments in R&D and IT for continued innovation and leadership in products, controls, eCommerce and factory automation and productivity.
A few other guidance points.
We still expect neutral foreign exchange.
We still expect interest and pension expense to be approximately $35 million.
We continue to expect an effective tax rate of approximately 21% on an adjusted basis for the full year.
We are still planning capital expenditures to be approximately $135 million this year, about $30 million of which is for the third plant at our campus in Mexico.
We expect construction to be completed at the end of 2021 and have the plant fully operational by mid-2022, and we expect nearly $10 million in annual savings from the third plant.
Free cash flow is now targeted to be approximately $375 million for the full year, up from prior guidance of approximately $325 million on the strong earnings performance in the first quarter and our current outlook.
And finally, we still expect the weighted average diluted share count for the full year to be between 37 million to 38 million shares, which incorporates our plans to repurchase $400 million of stock this year.
And with that, let's go to Q&A.
