Please be advised that the discussion of our financial results may include certain non-GAAP financial measures.
Each summer, as we prepare for the upcoming school year, we face operational and logistical demand to support the needs of millions of potential customers and thousands of teachers and support staff.
These past two summers have proven even more challenging, as a result of the ongoing global pandemic.
Our country has been facing disruptions in the supply chain, shortages of workers across industries, uncertainty in the workplace and renewed fears of inflation, among many other difficulties.
In spite of this, I have great faith in our country, our ability to persevere and create opportunities through adversities.
We are resilient, adaptive, innovative, compassionate, opinionated, proud and sometimes disagree, but we are always united, and as we navigate these recent challenges, we are evolving.
We're being forced to rethink certain norms, and one of those has been our approach to education.
I hope we now realize that there is no one size fits all solution to education, to training or to workforce development.
Certainly, some of the traditional methods work for many.
But we need to ensure we are providing choices for everybody.
Choices about how and where we learn, how employers recruit, how we educate and train the workforce and how we deliver opportunities for those seeking new paths.
Over 20 years ago, Stride was founded on the premise that students and families should have a choice in their education.
The pandemic has made this mission more critical than ever before.
We remain committed to ensuring that we are providing a best-in-class experience across the range of customers we serve, from early elementary to adult workforce solutions, and we want to make sure that these educational options are available to as many learners as possible.
The increasing demand for educational and training options continues to fuel our business.
The pandemic and the resulting disruption across schools and districts has led to a surge of support for School Choice.
Total support for School Choice has increased to almost 75% of the population.
The pandemic raised awareness for parents about their students' education, and many recognize, that they are not getting what they need from their existing school.
And that surge in interest spans private schools, voucher programs, virtual schools, and other similar programs, and specifically interest in virtual education has seen dramatic increases.
In large part, this was because so many were forced into it during the pandemic.
And while the experience was not always positive, it absolutely opened the eyes of many to the benefits of a virtual model.
And for us, this has translated into what we believe is a structural long-term increase in the demand for our products and services.
In fact, peak website traffic this year surpassed the traffic we saw last year at the height of the pandemic.
We are seeing well over 1 million unique visitors to our websites each month and growing.
and they are a more educated consumer.
Conversion rates for those who apply to our program are at a multiyear high.
We attribute this in large part to the increase in awareness.
Families that apply to our program know what they were looking for, and so they convert at higher rates.
This is an important trend for us over the longer term, and as families become more comfortable with virtual education and Stride's experience, it opens up other opportunities for us to offer other institutional and consumer offerings.
And while conversion rates have improved, so have conversion times.
Families both know what they want and we are also making it easier for them to enroll.
Our focus on the consumer experience and customer journey is just beginning, and if these early trends are any indication of what we can expect, we are going to deliver some really exciting customer experience improvements in the coming months and years ahead.
Our...
...to contribute almost $100 million in revenue during fiscal year 2022.
Gross margins for the quarter were 31.6%, down 340 basis points compared to the same period last year.
We returned to a more normal seasonal pattern in our materials and computer expenses this year.
Last year, we had a slower ramp in shipments to students, which pushed first quarter gross margins up.
Therefore, we expect our second quarter comparison to be more favorable, as spending this year is more in line with the normal seasonality we saw in years prior to last year.
We continue to feel confident in our ability to achieve the 2025 gross margin targets we laid out last November, and faster than we originally anticipated.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the quarter were $133.4 million, up $15.6 million from the first quarter of fiscal 2021.
The increase in SG&A is primarily driven by higher costs associated with enrollment and onboarding and the annualization of expenses from our acquisitions.
Stock-based comp was $8.3 million for the quarter.
We anticipate that we will finish the year with stock-based compensation in the range of $29 million to $31 million.
Adjusted operating income for the quarter was $4.5 million, adjusted EBITDA was $25.5 million.
Both these metrics were impacted by the seasonality of costs that I outlined above.
The timing of our costs and income in fiscal year 2021 had timing anomalies, that we explained during our quarterly calls last year.
This year, we expect our seasonality of expenses will be more similar to the years prior to FY '21, and as you can see in our guidance, we think the second quarter will be very strong from a profitability standpoint.
Interest expense for the quarter was $2 million.
As we mentioned last quarter, we have adopted new accounting guidance that eliminates the non-cash interest expense related to the amortization of the debt discount from our convertible note, this results in lower interest expense.
It also means that we have increased the long-term debt recorded on our balance sheet, even though we have not taken on any additional debt.
For the year, we expect our quarterly interest expense to be fairly consistent with the first quarter.
Our effective tax rate came in at 33%.
For FY '22, we believe we will finish the year, with a tax rate in the 28% to 30% range, mostly due to an increase in non-deductible compensation, above FY '21.
Capital expenditures in the quarter totaled $15.4 million, up $2.6 million from the prior period last year.
This increase was expected, as we invest in more mainstream consumer facing products, expected to contribute to future financial performance, as well as ongoing investments in our high growth career and adult learning businesses.
Free cash flow in the first quarter, defined as cash from operations less capex, was negative $146.9 million as compared to the prior year's $127.3 million.
This normal seasonality of cash flows relates to school launch and the enrollment and on boarding of new students.
We expect to see positive cash flow for the next three quarters.
For fiscal year 2022, we expect to have significantly higher cash flow from operations than in fiscal year 2021.
We ended the quarter with cash and cash equivalents of $218.5 million.
Turning to our guidance; for the second quarter of fiscal year 2022, the company is forecasting revenue in the range of $390 million to $400 million, adjusted operating income between $55 million and $60 million, and capital expenditures between $14 million and $17 million.
For the full year, we are forecasting revenue in the range of $1.56 billion to $1.60 billion, adjusted operating income between $165 million and $180 million, capital expenditures between $65 million and $75 million, and lastly an effective tax rate between 28% and 30%.
Without the collective effort of thousands of Stride employees, we could not have achieved the strong results we saw this quarter, and that we expect to see for the full year.
