This is Tim Argo, Senior Vice President of Finance for MAA.
Actual results may differ materially from our projections.
As detailed in our fourth quarter earnings report, MAA ended 2020 on a positive note, results were ahead of expectations, and we carry good momentum into calendar year 2021.
During the fourth quarter, leasing traffic was strong, and we captured 6% higher move-ins as compared to prior year.
And despite the normal seasonal slowdown during the holidays, we were able to capture positive blended lease-over-lease rent growth that equaled the prior third quarter with particularly strong renewal lease pricing averaging 5.2% in Q4.
Average physical occupancy also remained strong at 95.7% in the fourth quarter, a slight improvement from the performance in Q3.
We believe these trends supported by improving employment conditions and the positive migration trends across our footprint positions MAA for continued outperformance into the coming spring and summer leasing season.
Overall, conditions are setting up for a solid recovery cycle for apartment leasing fundamental across the Sun Belt over the next three years or so as demand recovers and supply levels moderate a bit into 2022.
I believe for several reasons that MAA is in particularly strong position as we head into the recovery part of the cycle.
First, we expect that our Sun Belt markets will continue to capture job growth, migration trends and demand for apartment housing that will be well ahead of national trends.
While there were clearly favorable Sun Belt migration trends by both employers and households prior to COVID, this past year the trends accelerated.
The primary reasons behind these favorable migration trends, including enhanced affordability, favorable business climates and lower taxes will still be with us well past the point we get the pressures associated with COVID behind us.
Secondly, the efforts we have under way this past year implementing change to a number of our processes involving new technology and web-based tools will continue to drive more opportunity for margin expansion.
Specifically, steps taken to automate aspects of both our leasing and maintenance service operations will drive more efficiency with personnel cost.
We expect to begin harvesting some of those early benefits later this year.
Our redevelopment operation aimed at upgrading and repositioning many of our existing properties continues to capture very attractive rent growth and returns on capital.
These higher levels of -- the higher levels of new apartment supply introduced into a number of markets over the past year will actually expand this redevelopment opportunity for us over the next couple of years.
Our external growth pipeline executed through in-house development, prepurchase of joint venture development projects and the acquisition of existing properties will continue to expand over the next year.
Finally, and importantly, our balance sheet remains in a very strong position with ample capacity to support both our redevelopment and our new growth initiatives.
Calendar year 2020 was certainly not the year we expected, but MAA's full cycle strategy with a uniquely diversified portfolio across the Sun Belt supported by a strong operating platform and balance sheet position the company to hold up well.
Our strategy is working and our platform capabilities are strong.
However, it's your intensity and passion for serving those who depend on our company that enables us to truly excel.
The recovery we saw beginning in May and June continued across the portfolio through the fourth quarter.
Leasing volume for the quarter was up 6%.
This allowed us to improve average daily occupancy from 95.6% in the third quarter to 95.7% in the fourth quarter.
In addition to the improvement in occupancy, we were able to hold blended rents in the fourth quarter, in line with the third quarter and an 80 basis point increase.
All in-place rents or effective rent growth on a year-over-year basis im...
...ers of continued same-store revenue growth for the fourth quarter, which is 1.8% and for the full year, which is 2.5%.
As expected, same-store operating expenses for the fourth quarter were impacted by growth in real estate taxes, insurance costs and the continued rollout of the bulk internet program, which is included in utilities expenses.
And though some of this pressure will carry into 2021, we expect overall same-store operating expenses to begin moderating this year, which I'll discuss just a bit more in a moment.
Our balance sheet remains in great shape.
We had no significant refinancing activity during the fourth quarter, but we continue to fund the development pipeline and internal redevelopment programs.
As Brad mentioned, our development pipeline has increased to eight deals with total projected costs of $595 million.
During the quarter, we funded $104 million of development costs, leaving less than half or another $259 million remaining to be funded toward the completion of the current pipeline.
Though still growing, our pipeline is still is only about 3% of our enterprise value, which is a modest risk, given the overall strength of our balance sheet and a diversified portfolio strategy.
As Tom mentioned, we also made good progress toward the -- during the quarter on our internal programs, funding a total of $40 million toward the interior unit redevelopments, Smart Home installations and external amenity upgrades, bringing our full year funding for lease programs to $76 million, which is expected to begin contributing to our growth more strongly late in 2021 and 2022.
We ended the year with low leverage, debt-to-EBITDA of only 4.8 times and with $850 million of combined cash and borrowing capacity under our line of credit.
Finally, we provided initial earnings guidance for 2021 with our release, which is detailed in our supplemental information package.
Core FFO for the full year is projected to be $6.30 to $6.60 per share, which is $6.45 at the midpoint.
The primary driver of earnings performance is same-store revenue growth, which is projected to be around 2% for the year.
This growth is based on the expectation of continued improving economic trends and job growth in our markets, as Tom outlined, and we believe these trends will support both stable occupancy levels, averaging around 95.5% for the year.
And modestly improving pricing trends through the year, driving effective rent growth for the year of around 1.7%.
An additional contribution of 30 to 40 basis points of projected revenue growth for the year is related to the final portion of our Double Play bulk internet program.
We do expect the first quarter to be our lowest revenue growth for the year as it will bear the full impact of 2020's pricing performance growing from there as the -- head from there as improving leasing trends take full effect.
Same-store operating expense growth is projected to moderate some as compared to 2020, will continue to be impacted by the rollout of Double Play and higher insurance costs with these costs combining for an estimated 1.4% of the same-store expense growth in 2021.
But excluding Double Play and insurance, all other same-store expenses are expected to increase in a more modest 2.5% to 3% range for the full year.
And this includes real estate tax growth of 3.75% at the midpoint, which is moderating, but still somewhat elevated.
Overhead costs for 2021 are projected to be more normalized, with total overhead expenses expected to be about $107 million for the year, which is a 2.8% increase over the midpoint of our original guidance for 2020.
Our forecast also assumes development funding of $250 million to $350 million for the year, primarily provided by projected asset sales of $200 million to $250 million.
And given our current forecast, we have no current plans to raise additional equity, and we expect to end the year with our debt-to-EBITDA just below 5 times.
So that's all we have in the way of prepared comments.
