mdu.com under the Investors tab.
President and CEO, Dave Goodin and I will be leading today's discussion.
Although the company believes that its expectations and beliefs are based on reasonable assumptions, actual results could differ materially.
Yesterday, we announced third quarter earnings of $139.3 million or $0.68 per share compared to third quarter 2020 earnings of $153.1 million or $0.76 per share.
On a year-to-date basis, we have earned $291.6 million or $1.44 per share compared to the prior year's $277.9 million or $1.39 per share.
Let's look at some of the details by segment starting with the quarterly comparison of our construction operations.
Construction Services reported third quarter earnings of $23.1 million compared to the prior year's record third quarter earnings of $29.8 million.
EBITDA at this business decreased $10.9 million from the same period in 2020 to $35.9 million.
Results were negatively impacted by $5.5 million after-tax for changes in estimates on a construction contract during the quarter.
This business also had decreased margins from higher employee cost attributed to a shortage of available skilled labor.
While we saw less storm recovery work this quarter in the prior year the demand for our general utility work has remained very strong.
Our Construction Materials business reported earnings of $96.3 million for the third quarter, down from the prior year's $107.3 million.
EBITDA decreased $13.4 million from the same period last year to $158.9 million.
The primary drivers behind the decreased earnings were lower asphalt and related product sales and margins, as well as lower contracting revenues.
Asphalt products and contracting margins were impacted by an increase in asphalt oil and diesel fuel costs as well as less available highway paving work in certain regions when you compare that to the strong third quarter we experienced in 2020.
Partially offsetting these impacts were lower selling, general administrative expense primarily from lower incentive accruals and lower benefit-related costs.
Turning to our Regulated Energy Delivery business, our Combined Utility business reported net income of $5.2 million for the quarter compared to a net loss of $800,000 in the third quarter of 2020.
The Electric Utility segment reported strong third quarter earnings of $20.6 million compared to $16.8 million for the same period in 2020.
Warmer weather helped drive an 11.1% increase in electric retail sales volumes, along with more businesses being open when compared to last year due to pandemic-related impacts.
Increased MISO revenues and transmission interconnect upgrades also had a positive impact on earnings of this business.
Our natural gas segment reported an expected seasonal loss of $15.4 million for the quarter, which was a $2.2 million improvement from the previous year.
Higher adjusted gross margin from rate relief and a 2% increase in retail and natural gas sales volumes drove the decreased loss, partially offset by higher O&M expense.
The pipeline business had earnings of $10.6 million in the third quarter compared to $8 million in the third quarter of 2020 primarily from higher AFUDC on the company's North Bakken Expansion project.
Also during the quarter MDU Resources experienced lower income tax benefits of approximately $4.6 million when compared to the third quarter of 2020 related to the timing of recognition of our consolidated annualized estimated tax rate.
That summarizes the key financial highlights from the quarter.
The strength of our two platform business model was evident during the third quarter as the strong results from our regulated energy delivery business helped offset some of the headwinds our construction businesses faced.
MDU Resources remains well positioned for a strong end to 2021 and beyond.
To summarize activity by business unit, I'll start off with the regulated energy delivery businesses.
Third quarter highlights for our utility operations include significantly hig...
...d quarter.
We now expect revenues to be in the range of $2.0 billion to $2.2 billion with margins comparable to 2020 levels.
And finally our Construction Materials business; Knife River had a solid third quarter although down from last year's record third quarter earnings.
The primary impacts to earnings at this business were higher costs for asphalt oil and diesel fuel as commodity costs return to levels closer to what we saw in 2019.
As you may remember, decreased energy related cost pushed our asphalt and asphalt related product line margins to a near all-time high last year.
Knife River has also been impacted by labor constraints largely for truck drivers as the COVID-19 pandemic amplified a prior and existing labor shortage.
While labor challenges continue to impact many construction companies, Knife River is actively engaged in attracting the next generation to the construction industry.
The company is nearly finishing building a training center on a 270-acre track of property in the Pacific Northwest.
That is designed to enhance the skills of its current employees and those of partner organizations, as well as provide training to new comers to the industry.
The Knife River training center features and 80,000 square foot heated indoor arena for training on trucks and heavy equipment and an attach 16,000 square foot office with classroom and lab facility.
The center already is holding classes helping students build marketable skills through both classroom education and hands on experience.
In addition to developing individual talents, the goal of the center is to showcase construction as a true career of choice.
The facilities and classes are open to all construction companies beyond even Knife River.
Given the third quarter results we have adjusted our margin guidance for this business.
Revenues are still expected to be in the range of $2.1 billion to $2.3 billion.
However, margins are now projected to be slightly lower than those seen in 2020.
Knife River backlog as of September 30 was $651.7 million, a 14% increase from the prior year's $571.3 million.
We are seeing more bidding opportunities in certain regions from strong economic conditions.
We have exceptional employees from entry-level to management level with a number of our employees spending their entire careers in the industry.
I am confident that our management teams will continue to navigate through the labor challenges we are seeing.
Over the last year and a half our teams have managed through numerous challenges presented by the COVID-19 pandemic and we continue to produce solid results.
Overall MDU Resources and our companies had solid performance through the third quarter and while results did not reach the level we anticipated our operations continue to operate safely and effectively.
Based on our results through the third quarter, we have adjusted our earnings per share guidance to now a range of $1.90 to $2.05 per share.
Looking forward, both our Construction Materials and Construction Services businesses are well positioned to benefit from the allocation of the American Rescue Plan Act Funds along with a federal infrastructure plan.
As the bipartisan bill progresses, the focus on traditional infrastructure projects including the construction of roads and bridges, electric vehicle and broadband build out an upgraded power infrastructure will provide significant upside for our construction companies.
And we'll also provide funding certainty for our customers and the coming years.
We also continue to seek acquisition opportunities that will enhance market share for our construction operations.
As always MDU Resources is committed to operating with integrity and with a focus on safety, while creating superior shareholder value as we continue providing essential services to our customers and delivering on our tag line of Building a Strong America.
I appreciate your interest in and commitment to MDU Resources and ask now that we open the line to questions.
