I'm joined today by Ron Tsoumas, our Chief Financial Officer.
Let's begin on Slide 4 with a brief summary of our financial results for our fiscal second quarter, which ended on October 31.
Methode's second quarter sales increased 17% to nearly $301 million.
Our net income increased 62%, and our diluted earnings per share increased 60%.
Ron will provide more detail on financial results a bit later.
Turning to the business highlights on Slide 5.
The $301 million in net sales, as well as our $45 million in income from operations, were both records for Methode.
The resulting operating income margin was 15%.
These record results -- these record results are validation of our strategy and the product of the relentless efforts and commitment of our global team.
In the quarter, we saw significant rebound in automotive demand as compared to the first quarter, which has been impacted by the pandemic and created uncertainty in OEM production schedules.
The Automotive segment sales for the quarter were also a record at $216 million.
It was another strong quarter for our EV businesses, as well.
Sales for EV applications were over 9% of our total consolidated sales.
We also saw continued strength for EV bookings during the quarter with the annual expected sales from those awards totaling over $28 million.
As many of you know, much of Methode's historical growth came from our user interface products.
With our move into vehicle LED lighting and with our long-standing reputation and capabilities in power distribution, in conjunction with user interface, Methode is uniquely qualified as a three-pronged solution provider for electric vehicles.
We are globally well positioned and anticipate continued growth in this market.
Regarding our balance sheet, we continued to generate strong free cash flow and reduced our net debt in the quarter.
We have ample liquidity and our net leverage ratio continues to be low.
The strength and flexibility to our balance sheet allows us to consider multiple paths to invest in the business in order to drive growth and shareholder return.
On COVID-19, I continue to take pride in our employees' incredible commitment to Methode and supporting our efforts to provide a safe work environment.
All of our facilities are currently open and we are making prudent use of work-from-home where possible.
We do anticipate seeing some level of uncertainty from COVID-19 throughout the remaining fiscal year.
However, as I stressed since the beginning of this pandemic, we will continue to invest in our businesses for long-term growth.
Moving to Slide 6.
During the second quarter, Methode booked a number of awards capitalizing on the strategic trends in vehicle electrification, LED lighting and data centers.
The awards identified here represent a cross-section of the business wins in the quarter and represent over $40 million in the annual business.
In vehicle electrification, we won awards for ambient and functional lighting, overhead console and busbar programs totaling over $28 million annually.
As I highlighted last quarter, we continued to win programs with OEMs in the US, Europe and Asia.
EV is a global growth driver for Methode.
In non-EV LED lighting, we were awarded programs for several auto applications.
We also continued to participate in the growth of the data centers driven by cloud computing with programs for busbars and pluggable modules.
Lastly, we experienced a bounce in aerospace with defense program award.
Of note, in the first half of the fiscal year, Methode booked awards approximately $100 million in annual sales.
Looking forward, we are providing sales and earnings per share guidance for only the fiscal 2021 third quarter due to the market risk and uncertainty from the ongoing pandemic.
Turning to Slide 7.
We recently presented at an investor conference, and I would like to share our key messaging from it.
Our strategic focus is on diversification, growth and financial improvement.
Given the progress that we've made...
...ake additional actions in the future based on conditions as required.
Net income was $38.6 million in the second quarter of fiscal '21 as opposed to $23.8 million in the second quarter of fiscal '20.
The main drivers between the fiscal periods were higher sales, receipt of $3.3 million of foreign government assistance due to COVID, lower selling and administrative expenses, partially offset by higher restructuring costs.
Shifting to EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure.
Fiscal '21 second quarter EBITDA was $60.2 million versus $43.6 million in the same period last year.
EBITDA was positively impacted by increased sales, foreign governmental COVID assistance and the benefit from restructuring actions taken in prior fiscal years.
A few other financial items to review.
In the second quarter of fiscal '21, we invested approximately $3.6 million in capex as compared to $13.6 million in the second quarter of fiscal '20.
The fiscal '21 year-to-date second quarter investment represents an approximately $30 million run rate for the current fiscal year.
The lower second quarter capex was simply due to timing as opposed to a conscious effort to curtail capex.
We have a strong balance sheet and intend to utilize it during this COVID-impacted fiscal year to make continued investments in our businesses to grow them organically in the future.
In addition, we continue to pursue opportunities for inorganic growth.
Our intent is to emerge from the COVID pandemic stronger than we went into this crisis by judiciously using our strong balance sheet to our long-term advantage.
Income tax expense in the second quarter of fiscal '21 was $7.6 million as compared to a tax expense of $5.2 million in the second quarter of fiscal '20.
The fiscal '21 second quarter tax rate was 16.5% as compared to 17.9% in the same period last fiscal year.
This relatively minor difference in effective tax rate was due to jurisdictional earnings and not discrete income tax activity.
We deleveraged gross debt by $2.2 million in the second quarter.
Since our acquisition of Grakon in September of 2018, when adjusting for the $100 million precautionary credit facility draw in March of 2020, we have reduced gross debt by $110 million.
Net debt decreased by $29.5 million in the second quarter of fiscal '21 as compared to the fiscal '20 year-end from $134.8 million, to $105.3 million.
We ended the second quarter with $242.3 million in cash, which includes the $100 million precautionary draw on the credit facility in March.
In November, we repaid $50 million of the March precautionary draw, and we'll continue to evaluate the landscape in the third quarter and may pay down the precautionary draw even further.
Our debt to trailing 12 months EBITDA ratio, which is used for our bank covenants, is approximately 1.7.
This figure includes the impact of the precautionary $100 million draw we initiated in March.
Without the draw, the ratio would have been approximately 1.2.
Our net debt to trailing 12 months EBITDA ratio was a strong 0.5.
Free cash flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, which effective in fiscal '21 is defined as cash provided from operating activities minus capex.
Prior to fiscal '21, it was defined as net income plus depreciation and amortization less capex.
For the fiscal '21 second quarter, free cash flow was $36.7 million as compared to $35.1 million in the second quarter of fiscal '20.
As Don mentioned in his remarks, we are providing revenue and earnings per share guidance for the third quarter, which is subject to disruption at any time due to a variety of factors including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic situation.
Please note that the third quarter of fiscal '21 contains 13 work weeks, whereas the third quarter of fiscal '20 had 14 work weeks.
The revenue range for the third quarter is between $265 million and $285 million.
Diluted earnings per share range is between $0.69 and $0.85 per share.
Don, that concludes my comments.
Operator, we are ready to take questions.
