I'm joined today by Ron Tsoumas, our Chief Financial Officer.
Let's begin with the business highlights on Slide 4.
Our sales for the quarter were $301 million.
Excluding favorable currency translation, our organic growth was up 37% from the prior year.
It should be noted, however, that our prior-year quarter was significantly impacted by the pandemic.
In this year's fourth quarter, our team faced multiple challenges, first with the chip shortages and then with the plastic resin shortages, resulting from the freeze in Texas.
These issues, along with the ongoing port congestion, created meaningful headwinds.
In response the Methode team did what it does best, recognize the challenge early, work with the customers and suppliers to develop solutions and then execute.
As a result, we were able to meet the high end of our sales guidance for the quarter.
However, the supply chain disruptions required remedial actions such as expedited shipping and premium component pricing that significantly impacted our margins.
Moving forward, these challenges are lingering into the first quarter and some may continue until the end of this calendar year.
However, we have confidence in the situation improving as evidenced by our guidance for the full fiscal year.
The growth that we realized in the fourth quarter was due to increased demand across most of our businesses that was especially focused in auto and commercial vehicle.
We also saw growth in our Dabir business as a result of a major hospital system order.
Overall, we had strong awards for EV, LED, lighting and e-Bikes.
Last quarter we reported that sales into EV applications were over 12% of consolidated sales.
This quarter, EV sales were over 13% of consolidated sales and we continue to expect the number to be in the mid-teens for fiscal 2022.
Methode's combination of user interface, LED lighting and power distribution solutions is a winning formula in EV, but we are especially seeing growth in our power offering.
Regarding our balance sheet.
We generated $31 million in free cash flow and further reduced our net debt in the quarter.
We continue to have ample liquidity and our net leverage ratio is now near zero.
The strength and flexibility of our balance sheet allows us to consider multiple paths to invest in the business in order to drive growth and ultimately shareholder return.
As an example, this quarter, we initiated a stock buyback program and purchased $7.5 million in Methode shares.
After the quarter end, we also announced a 27% increase to our dividend.
Methode's business model continues to generate excellent free cash and we are allocating capital per our balanced approach.
Moving to Slide 5.
Methode finished the fiscal year with another strong quarter of business awards.
These awards continue to capitalize on key market trends like vehicle electrification, LED lighting in auto and cloud computing.
The awards identified here represent a cross-section of the business wins in the quarter and represent over $40 million in annual business at full production.
In vehicle electrification, we won awards for power distribution, user interface and LED lighting programs.
We continue to win programs with OEMs globally in both auto and commercial vehicle applications.
In non-EV LED lighting, we were awarded programs for automotive and motorcycle applications.
In cloud computing, we continue to see demand for our power distribution products and data center applications.
Additionally, we continue to participate in the growth of e-bikes which utilizes our proprietary magnetoelastic technology.
We also won two awards for traditional user interface solutions as well as secured a power distribution award for our wind farm application.
Turning to Slide 6.
Despite having one less week, we were able to deliver year-over-year organic growth and finished with our good sales of $1,088 million for the year.
Also a record for the year was our free cash flow of $155 million.
The team's disciplined focus on ...
...decreased by $127.9 million to $6.9 million in the fiscal year '21 from $134.8 million at the end of fiscal year '20.
We ended the fourth quarter with $233.2 million in cash.
Our debt to trailing 12-month EBITDA ratio, which is used for our bank covenants, is approximately 1.25.
Our net debt to trailing 12-months EBITDA ratio was 0.04, virtually nil.
Free cash flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, which effective in fiscal year '21 is defined as net cash provided from operating activities less capex.
For fiscal year '21 fourth quarter, free cash flow was $31.2 million as compared to $47.8 million in the fourth quarter of fiscal '20.
The decrease was mainly due to higher working capital in the quarter to support year-over-year increased sales.
For the full fiscal year '21, we produced record net cash provided by operating activities of nearly $180 million and record free cash flow of $155 million.
While we don't expect to equal the fiscal year '21 free cash flow results in fiscal '22, largely due to increased working capital to support fiscal year '22 sales growth and increased capex, we do expect to generate sizable free cash flow.
We anticipate continuing our proven history of consistently generating reliable cash flows which allow for ample funding of future organic growth, inorganic growth and return of capital to the shareholders.
In the fourth quarter of fiscal year '21, we invested approximately $4.8 million in capex as compared to $10.2 million in the fourth quarter of fiscal year '20.
The lower fourth quarter capex was simply due to timing as opposed to a conscious effort to curtail capex.
We approved capex during the quarter and the full fiscal year that is not yet reflected in the cash flow statement as the actual cash outlay for these approved expenditures will occur in future reporting periods.
We have a strong balance sheet and we'll continue utilizing it by continuing investment in our businesses to grow them organically in the future.
In addition, we continue to pursue opportunities for inorganic growth.
Regarding capital allocation, we recently announced two initiatives.
First, on March 31 we announced a $100 million share repurchase program, which we executed $7.5 million of repurchases during the fourth quarter of fiscal year '21.
In addition, last week we announced a 27% increase in our quarterly dividend from $0.11 per share to $0.14 per share.
We are confident in our cash-generating ability to simultaneously invest in organic growth, inorganic growth and provide an ample return of capital to the shareholders.
Don mentioned in his remarks, we are providing revenue and earnings per share guidance in the first quarter of fiscal '22 due to the uncertain direct and indirect impacts from the ongoing semiconductor supply shortage and the continued challenges from other supply disruptions, including port congestion.
The revenue range for the first quarter of fiscal year '22 is between $285 million and $300 million.
Diluted earnings per share range is between $0.68 per share to $0.80 per share.
The revenue range for the full fiscal year '22 is between $1.175 billion and $1.235 billion.
Diluted earnings per share ranges between $3.35 per share to $3.75 per share.
The midpoint of the range represents an 11% increase over fiscal '21 despite having a significantly higher tax rate in fiscal year '22.
The wider range is due to the uncertainty from the supply chain disruption for semiconductors and other materials on both Methode and its customers.
Factors that could result in us moving toward the higher end of the sales range include higher sales due to lesser disruption of supply to us and/or our customers which would result in higher demand for our products.
Lesser disruption would also minimize the cost of sales impact from premium freight, factory inefficiencies and, to a lesser extent, tariffs and other logistic factors such as port congestion.
Don, that concludes my comments.
Kathryn, we are ready to take questions.
