Participating on the call today are Aaron Ravenscroft, president, and chief executive officer; and Dave Antoniuk, executive vice president, and chief financial officer.
However, actual results differ materially from any implied or actual projections due to one or more of the factors, among others, described in the company's latest SEC filings.
And with that, I will now turn over the call to you, Aaron.
Clearly, in retrospect, the economic dislocations created by our return to normal were far greater than anyone anticipated.
That being said, 2021 was a year of transition for Manitowoc on multiple fronts.
While we bounced back operationally from the COVID shutdowns, we also made significant changes in our strategic orientation.
As we laid out a year ago, we continued to build out our tower crane business and the [Inaudible] regions, launching two locally designed cranes.
We accelerated our all-terrain new product development, which will bear fruit at the upcoming BAUMA trade show this October.
We invested $15 million in our tower crane rental fleet in Europe, which helped us increase our market share in Germany and win some strategic orders with key accounts.
And finally, we completed two acquisitions in North America, which lays the groundwork for us to grow our aftermarket presence in the local mobile cranes market.
And currently, we continue to make progress on our ESG journey and more traditional safety terms.
The team doubled our hazard observations that we call SLAMS, and our recordable injury rate, excluding acquisitions, was 1.39 for the year.
While our RIR was up slightly year over year, it is still well below the industry benchmark, and I am very pleased with our performance in the face of the previous year.
On the sustainability front, we implemented [Inaudible], a tracking system to help us account for our environmental footprint, and we are utilizing the Manitowoc Way to drive continuous improvement.
For example, we assembled a global team to collaborate on paint booth emission reductions and have already begun to realize benefits.
As for diversity, we've been leaning and hard on this initiative to help offset our labor shortages.
Namely in Shady Grove, we implemented our first ESL program to help attract Spanish-speaking members of our community, and we have begun to offer relocation incentives to nearby cities such as Philadelphia to attract employees to our internal welding and machining schools.
With respect to our balance sheet, we continue to position the company for long-term growth.
After investing $40 million in capex and $186 million on two acquisitions, we closed the year with $75 million of cash on hand and $250 million of liquidity.
Considering the difficulties of managing working capital in the current environment, I'm comfortable with where we ended 2021.
For sure, the economic dislocations created by the return to normal were far greater than we anticipated a year ago, and I am extremely appreciative of all hard work by our team to minimize inflation as best as we could, implement price increases, and manage parts shortages while executing our long term strategy.
Specifically, I would like to recognize Jim Glenwright and Sebastian Maleigh, who recently won the CEO award for the Manitowoc Way.
In the midst of all of the economic chaos of 2021, Manitowoc encountered a cyberattack in June.
Jim led our effort to restore our IT system all at the same time continue to implement a new ERP system for MGX Equipment Services.
Meanwhile, across the pond, Sebastian earned his award for his contributions to the continuous improvement of our manufacturing processes and our tower factories.
He led projects to implement an automated tube cutting machine and move on while kicking off another significant machining project in our [Inaudible] factory.
I'm very proud of the commitment and passion of our employees at Manitowoc, and these two leaders truly represent the spirit of The Manitowoc Way.
Finally, I am pleased to...
...otal cost of capital.
Our 2022 guidance assumes that our current capital structure will remain in place for the full year.
As we look ahead to 2022, we expect continuing global supply chain and logistic challenges, moderation in inflationary pressure, and an unstable labor market throughout the first half of the year.
In the second half of the year, we anticipate an improved price cost dynamic and a stabilizing supply chain, logistics, and labor market.
Based on this outlook, our 2022 guidance is as follows.
Net sales are approximately $2 billion to $2.2 billion.
With regard to SG&A, it is important to note that our adjusted SG&A expenses for the year are expected to increase approximately 21% of which approximately $32 million is from acquisitions.
Our adjusted EBITDA guidance is approximately $130 million to $160 million.
Depreciation and amortization of approximately $65 million.
Interest expense is approximately $28 million to $30 million.
Provision for income tax expense approximately $13 million to $17 million.
Adjusted diluted earnings per share approximately $0.65 to $1.35.
And capital expenditures of approximately $85 million.
With our recent acquisitions and growing rental fleets, I think it's worth taking a moment to discuss how these initiatives will impact our capital expenditure investments.
As we have discussed before, oftentimes a crane is rented for two years and then sold after the acquisition value has decreased.
As such, there is always a certain level of churn in a rental fleet.
As we sell use machines, we will replenish the rental fleet with the proceeds.
We expect this to be approximately $35 million in 2022.
In addition, we are still growing our rental fleets strategically to support RPOs and market share growth and target markets such as the German Tower Crane Market.
This capex investment will approximate $25 million in 2022.
The remaining $25 million of capex will be for a normal factory capex.
Please keep in mind that the management of our rental fleet and the related capex is far more dynamic than the traditional manufacturing capex.
It is heavily dependent upon opportunistic sales transactions.
In certain instances, capex could be generated by an unexpected sale of a crane that is on rent, which will likely need to need to be replaced.
In other instances, capex can be generated by an RPO opportunity, which can be multi crane deals.
Let's move to Slide 6.
As we begin in 2022, our strategy remains unchanged and underpinned by our four strategic initiatives.
We will continue to look for attractive acquisitions to help accelerate these initiatives, and we will opportunistically evaluate our capital and debt structure to help ensure that we have the necessary flexibility as the US economy faces increasing interest rates.
Adding a little more clarity and focus to our strategy, I am pleased to announce our vision for aftermarket, which we call Cranes Plus 50.
Our goal is to increase our aftermarket or non-new machine sales by 50% over the next five years.
Historically, our business model has been highly product focus.
Our objective is to grow beyond machines and products and to sell more aftermarket parts, field service, lifting solutions, RPOs, rentals for fleet management, used sales, remanufactured cranes, and digital solutions that provide greater customer connectivity.
As a jumping-off point, we ended 2021 with $449 million in non-new machine sales, which will be outlined in our 10-K filing.
In closing, Manitowoc continues to strive to get closer to our customers and to grow our less cyclical and higher-margin revenue streams.
We continue to reposition the company for long-term growth while we weather the near-term economic storm.
We are confident that our investment in our four growth initiatives will allow us to deliver on our Cranes Plus 50 strategies and increase our non-new machine sales by 50% over the next five years, which we believe will fuel greater long-term returns for our shareholders.
