This is Ned Zachar.
We very much appreciate your participation.
Part of my new duties includes covering the usual and customary safe harbor information for these calls.
So please bear with me for just a few minutes.
pb.com and by clicking on Investor Relations.
Our format today is going to be familiar.
Marc, the floor is yours.
Ned brings a wealth of experience to the role including investing and analyst experience.
Ned has also been an investor in our debt [Phonetic], so he is familiar with our company.
Turning to the quarter.
Given a return to pre-COVID top line seasonality, the distortions in last year results in supply and demand imbalances, there were many different crosscurrents running through the quarter and year-to-year comparisons.
While it's easy to get lost in the numbers, from my perspective, the headline is this.
Demand for our products and services remain strong, and we continue to make progress, repositioning our company for long-term success.
Our Presort business had an excellent quarter from both a top and bottom line perspective.
The Presort team was able to overcome labor and transportation inflation by managing price and productivity and moved back into our long-term profit model.
Importantly, the investments we have made in our network and technology have positioned us well to drive even more productivity and help more clients.
Our SendTech business performed close to the long-term model even though supply constraints hit the top and bottom line.
Equipment sales in our backlog both increased in the quarter, evidencing strong demand.
We will continue to battle through supply demand dynamics, but clearly our new product innovations are making it a very positive difference.
In addition, more of our business is moving to a subscription model.
While this depresses short term revenue, increased subscription revenue is a very positive harbinger for the future.
Within Global Ecommerce, while there are year-to-year aberrations, there are two things that are important to the long-term success of this business.
The first is service to our clients.
We have improved our end to end cycle times by 25% and since the beginning of the year, which is a significant improvement.
And secondly, gross margin.
It is notable that gross margin improved from prior year despite the fact that we had a substantial capacity and without the benefit of peak volumes.
We have foreshadowed that as volumes normalize, thus, margin improvement would happen, and it did.
We have been very disciplined about the kind of volumes we have committed to the fourth quarter, and we like what we have, both in terms of overall volume commitments, the economics and the kind of volume we anticipate receiving.
Like others in the industry, we saw volumes decreased year-to-year in the quarter, but we very much like how we are positioned for the fourth quarter and going forward.
However, to be clear, we expect there to be some challenges this peak season.
Daily headlines talk about the supply chain disruptions, and larger players are already carrying out an impact on the results or outlook.
We are not immune to these supply chain constraints more as it relates to our Ecommerce client supply levels and, to a degree, our SendTech products.
While it remains a level of uncertainty, our team is substantially better positioned this year based on the actions we have taken thus far.
Additionally and similar to the market, we're looking at pricing to help offset some of the higher costs, particularly as it relates to transportation and labor.
For example, within Ecommerce, we have put in place a surcharge for this peak season and recently announced our annual general rate increase effective for 2022.
And we've implemented pricing increases in other parts of our business where it's justified by the new and increased value we are delivering for clients through our new product portfolio.
So lots of moving pieces, but from my perspective, a successful quarter across many dime...
... the strength of our management systems, as well as the investments we have made in technology, have enabled us to hold productivity levels flat to prior year.
In the end, we are pleased that volumes and revenue growth more than offset the market-driven increases in our Presort costs.
We will continue to invest in automation and productivity in order to help us continue to grow EBIT dollars and expand profit margins.
For the quarter, Presort EBITDA was $27 million, and EBITDA margin was 20%.
EBIT was $21 million, and EBIT margin was 15%.
All of these are significant improvements from prior year and aligned with our long-term targets.
Moving to the SendTech segment.
SendTech revenue was $338 million, which was down 5% from prior year.
As noted earlier, last year's third quarter included investment gains which benefited financing revenue and created a challenging year-over-year comparison.
Last year's investment gains represent about 200 basis points of the year-over-year revenue decline for SendTech in the quarter.
Inside SendTech, I'd like to highlight Equipment Sales, which is a leading indicator for future revenue streams.
For the quarter, Equipment Sales saw 4% growth despite some supply chain challenges in obtaining product.
I'd also highlight our efforts to shift our business mix to the growth areas of the shipping and mailing markets.
Our new SendTech products and offerings have been gaining traction in the marketplace led by the SendPro family, which is an all-in-one system that offers multi-carrier alternatives to find the best rates and delivery options, track parcels, gain postage discounts and manage spend.
In North America, more than 25% of our revenue comes from these new products, and we have begun to launch these products in select international markets.
We are also seeing strong demand for our SendPro mailstation product, which we launched in April 2020 and have shipped over 40,000 of these devices to date.
Our SaaS-based Subscription revenue grew 21%, and paid subscribers for our SendPro online product were up 58% over prior year.
I am also pleased to report that we have been able to satisfy the strong demand for our products, while managing supplier and transportation disruptions that have become prevalent across global supply chains.
SendTech EBITDA was $107 million, and EBITDA margin was 32%.
EBIT was $99 million, and EBIT margin was 29%.
Margins reflect the decrease in high-margin financing results as well as increased freight and shipping costs that have become a theme across the corporate sector.
It's important to note that we have implemented pricing actions where it is justified by the new and increased value we are delivering for clients through our newer product portfolio.
Let me now turn to our outlook.
As Marc discussed, we expect there will be some supply chain disruptions.
We are not immune to the marketwide supply chain challenges, but we believe our outlook takes this into consideration, and we are reaffirming what we have previously communicated.
We still expect annual revenue at constant currency to grow over prior year in the low to mid-single-digit range.
We still expect adjusted earnings per share to be in the range of $0.35 to $0.42.
And we continue to expect Global Ecommerce to be EBITDA positive for the year.
We still expect free cash flow to be lower than prior year driven primarily by a rebound in Capex investments largely as it relates to the expansion of our Ecommerce network and productivity initiatives, along with a slower decline in our finance receivables.
We also expect our tax rate in the fourth quarter to return to a normalized level.
In summary, I feel that Pitney Bowes is in very good shape both operationally and financially.
We have taken important steps throughout the year to strengthen our network capabilities and footprint, our balance sheet and our human capital.
These actions leave us well-positioned to achieve our financial objectives for the year and going forward.
