Jim Hatfield, Chief Administrative Officer; Daniel Froetscher, APS's President and COO; and Barbara Lockwood, Senior Vice President, Public Policy, are also here with us.
First, I need to cover a few details with you.
Note that the slides contain reconciliations of certain non-GAAP financial information.
It will also be available by telephone through May 15.
Before I get started, let me say, I hope everyone is doing well.
This is certainly an unexpected way to start our year, but the last several weeks have only reaffirmed to me that our company and our people are resilient, agile and prepared to handle whatever comes our way.
We recognize the realities of COVID-19 and the challenges that people are facing, and we remain committed, first and foremost, to safely delivering reliable power to Arizona, building shareholder value by ensuring customer value.
In March, we made the decision to deploy as much of our workforce as possible to work from home and to change our work practices for those essential workers needed to keep the lights on for our customers and to prepare for the Arizona summer.
The transition from normal course of business to social distancing and revised safety procedures was seamless from our reliability standpoint and for our customers.
While our processes have changed, our priorities have not.
From a financial perspective, our strengths lie on a strong balance sheet, good credit rating and sufficient liquidity.
We can and will weather the storm.
We recognize that in order to serve both our customers and our shareholders, it is important to maintain our financial health.
Financial stability is a key driver in our decision-making, and it's essential to support our long-term goals.
Operationally, the rigor of our preparation and the strength of our team position us well to navigate the challenges presented by COVID-19.
Our pandemic plan was established, tested, refined and rehearsed before any of the COVID-19 impact began to hit us.
As I mentioned earlier, we've transitioned as many employees as possible to working from home.
I'll note, that includes over 140 call center associates who we moved very quickly to seamlessly continue to provide customer service from their homes, and that includes the oversight folks as well, an incredible job by the IT group there, as well as our field employees who continue to prepare for our peak summer season.
All necessary summer preparedness work, including vegetation management and planned outages at our power plants, have continued.
In an effort to minimize the duration of those outages and the number of people required to be physically present, we prioritized essential work and deferred some discretionary maintenance until later in the year.
I'm pleased to share that we completed the Palo Verde Unit two refueling outage earlier this week, ensuring that this key resource will be available to serve customers this summer.
The refueling outage had a reduced scope to allow the completion of the essential work, with 40% less contractors than normal.
In addition, we've deferred nonessential transmission and distribution work that would require more than a two hour planned outage to our residential customers during this time.
We are grateful for the support we've received from so many who've helped our employees stay safe, including Armored Outdoor Gear, one of our commercial customers in Flagstaff.
We were able to quickly secure 3,000 masks for APS, including an expedited quantity of 300 for Palo Verde employees at a time when masks were harder to come by.
It was really a win-win situation.
We were able to keep our employees safe and, at the same time, support our local economy.
Based on what we've seen so far in energy usage and customer load growth, and Ted will talk more about this, but we know that circumstances will continue to evolve.
Our resource plans for additional generation remain in place.
We expect to announce the results of outstanding wind and solar request for propos...
...er year.
Just five of the automations planned for the first part of this year are expected to produce an NPV benefit of $1.8 million over the next five years.
These examples and our focus on reducing costs will serve us well, not just through the interim challenges, but also in achieving our long-term goals of providing customers with affordable and reliable service.
While total sales will likely continue to lag during the duration of the stay-at-home period, we remain confident in the long-term growth of our service territory.
According to the Arizona Technology Council's quarterly impact report, Arizona tech sector is growing at a rate 40% faster than the U.S. overall.
Metro Phoenix area showed strong job growth through February of 2020, which has consistently been above the national average.
Through February, employment in Metro Phoenix increased 3.2% compared to 1.5% for the entire U.S. Construction employment in Metro Phoenix increased by 5.4%, and manufacturing employment increased by 2.1%.
This data reflects pre COVID-19 conditions, and we expect to see the 2.2% customer growth rate we experienced in the first quarter to slow in the near term.
However, the qualities and fundamentals that I mentioned that have consistently attracted residents to Arizona, including a low cost of living, attractive weather and robust employment opportunities, remain intact and likely to continue supporting long-term growth after the economy normalizes.
In regard to our future capital investments, we remain committed to the $4.7 billion capex forecast for the 2020 through 2022 time frame, largely driven by clean energy investments.
Information regarding COVID-19 and the potential impact is fluid and changing rapidly.
We will continue to assess our capex plans, load forecast, sales expectations, O&M and other financial data points as more information becomes available.
We recognize there are potential scenarios where COVID-19 impacts could necessitate changes in the timing or scope of our investment plans.
However, as of today, we do not believe the limited load reductions experienced thus far require any alterations to our long-term plans.
Similarly, we continue to believe 2020 Pinnacle West consolidated earnings of $4.75 to $4.95 per share remain achievable, assuming the impacts for COVID-19 dissipate by the end of the second quarter, and customer and sales growth resumes once the economy normalizes.
Additional O&M savings are also being assessed by our management team to mitigate the impact from lost revenue.
A complete list of key factors and assumptions underlying our 2020 guidance can be found on slides three and four.
Another advantage for Pinnacle West is our financial health.
We have a strong balance sheet, A- credit rating, well-funded pensions, sufficient liquidity and no equity needs in 2020.
We currently have $1.2 billion in revolver capacity with an option to increase by another $500 million.
As of May 1, we have drawn down $310 million on our revolvers.
In addition, all remaining Pinnacle West long-term debt maturing in 2020 will occur in November and December, and APS's $200 million term loan matures in August.
With all the long-term maturities falling late in the year, we have ample flexibility to assess the market conditions and evaluate our options.
Further, at year-end 2019, our pension was 97% funded.
With our liability driven investment strategy, our pension was 96.4% funded as of March 31, 2020, highlighting our resilience to the market volatility.
Last week, we proudly celebrated 136 years of service to Arizona customers and communities, and we've been through plenty of challenges before.
As Jeff mentioned, we were well prepared for this current challenge.
We started from a position of financial strength.
The seasonality of our jurisdiction and the exceptional skills and sophistication of our team give us confidence that we will effectively navigate the near term and continue to work toward our long-term commitments.
