Before we get started, I'll draw your attention to Slide 2 and a brief cautionary statement.
We appreciate you joining us for our first-quarter earnings call.
Moving to the agenda for today's call on Slide 3.
I'll share a few operational highlights as well as an update on the two strategic transactions we announced in March.
Joe will provide a more detailed overview of first-quarter financial results.
Turning to Slide 4.
Today, we announced the first-quarter reported net loss of $2.39 per share.
This reflects special item net losses of $2.67 per share, primarily related to reporting WPD's discontinued operations this quarter.
Adjusting for special items, first-quarter earnings from ongoing operations were $0.28 per share, compared with $0.27 per share a year ago.
These results were in line with our expectations for the quarter.
Compared to last year, improved margins were the most significant driver of the increase, primarily due to more favorable weather compared to the mild winter we experienced in 2020.
Shifting to a few operational highlights.
Now over a year into the pandemic, I'm pleased to report that operationally, all seven of our utilities continue to perform extremely well with no operational issues to report.
We continue to operate in a very similar manner to last year with many of our team members continuing to work from home.
We continue to stress the importance of social distancing and mask wearing within our facilities and at our work site.
With vaccinations in full swing, we are beginning to turn our attention to return-to-office planning and protocols.
However, we are not expecting to deviate from our current mode of operations for at least a few more months and perhaps until the end of summer for some of our locations.
We've been able to operate extremely well during this virtual working environment, as evidenced not only by our strong operational performance, but also our ability to execute two significant strategic transactions simultaneously in a fully virtual manner.
Our number one priority has been and will continue to be the safety of our employees and our customers, so we will be very diligent in our return-to-office planning.
Moving to an update on the Kentucky rate case proceedings.
We reached unanimous settlement agreements subject to Kentucky Public Service Commission approval with all parties in our rate reviews for both LG&E and KU.
The agreements cover all matters in the review except for net metering.
We have a long track record of working constructively with the parties to our rate reviews to achieve positive outcomes that balance the interest of all our stakeholders, and this time was no exception.
The settlement agreements were filed with the KPSC on April 19, and hearings were held last week.
We expect KPSC orders on all settled matters by June 30 with new rates effective July 1.
I'll review the terms of the settlement agreements in a bit more detail on the next slide.
Moving to Pennsylvania, PPL Electric Utilities recently received the 2021 Energy Star Partner of the Year award from the EPA and Department of Energy.
This award recognizes outstanding corporate energy management programs and is the EPA's highest level of recognition.
It reflects PPL's commitment to protecting the environment and helping customers save energy and money.
In April, we also made a number of leadership changes to help further position the company for long-term success, especially as we plan for the integration of Narragansett Electric into the PPL family of regulated utilities.
Greg Dudkin was promoted to chief operating officer of PPL from his prior role as president of PPL Electric Utilities.
Under Greg's leadership over the past decade, PPL Electric Utilities has been focused squarely on creating the utility of the future.
The business has developed one of the nation's most advanced electricity networks, has consistently delivered award-winning customer satisfaction, and has firmly established itself as an in...
...s as well as associated inventory and decommissioning costs.
The rider would provide recovery over a 10-year period upon retirement as well as a return on those investments at the utilities than weighted average cost of capital.
As we announced in January, Mill Creek Unit 1 is expected to retire in 2024.
And Mill Creek Unit two and E.W. Brown Unit three are expected to be retired in 2028 as they reach the end of their economic useful lives.
These units represent a combined 1,000 megawatts of coal-fired generating capacity.
The settlements also proposed full deployment of advanced metering infrastructure.
I'll note that the capital cost of the proposed AMI investment is not included in the revenue requirements in these rate cases.
We'll record our investment in the AMI project as CWIP and accrue AFUDC during the AMI implementation period.
And finally, the settlement agreements include commitments that LG&E and KU will not increase base rates for at least four years, subject to certain exceptions.
I'll cover our first-quarter segment results on Slide 6.
regulated segment from our quarterly earnings walk.
First, we have adjusted the 2020 corporate and other amount to reflect certain costs previously reflected in the U.K. regulated segment, which was primarily interest expense.
The total amount of these costs was about $0.01 per share for the quarter.
In addition, beginning with our 2021 results, corporate-level financing costs will no longer be allocated for segment reporting purposes.
Those costs were primarily related to the acquisition financing of the Kentucky regulated segment and will also be reflected in corporate and other moving forward.
Now turning to the domestic segment drivers.
Our Pennsylvania regulated segment results were flat compared to a year ago.
During the first quarter, we experienced higher distribution, adjusted gross margins resulting primarily from higher sales volumes due to favorable weather compared to the prior year, a year in which we experienced a mild winter.
Weather in Pennsylvania was essentially flat to our forecast for Q1 2021, with quarterly heating degree days slightly below normal conditions.
Adjusted gross margins related to transmission were slightly lower for the first quarter.
Returns on additional capital investments were offset by lower peak transmission demand and a reserve recorded as a result of a challenge to the transmission formula rate return on equity.
Settlement negotiations related to the challenge are currently proceeding, but there can be no assurance that they will result in a final settlement.
Finally, we experienced lower O&M expense of about $0.01 per share in Pennsylvania during the first quarter compared to 2020.
Turning to our Kentucky regulated segment.
Results were $0.02 per share higher than our comparable results in Q1 2020.
The increase was primarily driven by higher sales volumes, primarily due to favorable weather.
And similar to Pennsylvania, weather was flat compared to our forecast.
Partially offsetting the increase from higher sales was higher operation and maintenance expense, primarily at our generation plants.
Results at corporate and other were $0.01 lower compared to a year ago, driven primarily by higher interest expense from the additional debt we issued at the start of the pandemic to ensure we had adequate liquidity to navigate the uncertainty.
We expect our interest expense to be reduced significantly after we complete the liability management following the closing of the WPD sale.
In summary, we continue to deliver electricity and natural gas safely and reliably for our customers during the pandemic.
We're on pace to close our strategic transactions within the expected time frames while making good progress on the integration and transition planning for Narragansett Electric.
And we remain very excited about the opportunity we have in front of us to reposition PPL for future growth and success.
With that, operator, let's open the call for Q&A.
