This information is available on our Investor Relations website, investors.
We direct you to our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a detailed discussion of these risks and uncertainties.
During the call, we will also discuss non-GAAP financial measures as defined by SEC Regulation G, including funds from operations or FFO, core FFO, and Same-Center net operating income.
As such, it is important to note that management's comments include time-sensitive information that may only be accurate as of today's date, February 18, 2021.
At this time, all participants are in listen-only mode.
We request that everyone ask only one question and one follow-up to allow as many of you as possible to ask questions.
If time permits, we are happy for you to requeue for additional questions.
On the call today will be Steven Tanger, our Executive Chair; Stephen Yalof, Chief Executive Officer; and Jim Williams, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer.
Clearly, 2020 was a year like no other.
And I want to express my deep appreciation for the entire Tanger team who have worked so diligently to navigate the challenges brought on by the global pandemic.
Virtually, all of our tenants have been facing mandates, directing them to close their stores, operate at reduced capacity and comply with additional health and safety measures.
In 2020, there were several retail bankruptcies and restructurings, resulting in space recapture and higher vacancy than historic levels.
But also providing us with opportunities to further diversify and upgrade our tenant mix.
This past year also highlighted the positive characteristics of the Tanger Outlet platform.
As evidenced, by the resilience, our portfolio has demonstrated since governmental mandates were lifted starting in the second quarter of 2020.
Our open-air centers provide an excellent value proposition for both retailers and shoppers that cannot be duplicated by e-commerce or other brick-and-mortar formats.
These desirable characteristics are demonstrated in our recent results, including the rapid pace that stores reopened after mandates were lifted and the positive trends in our traffic and rent collection metrics.
Our balance sheet further differentiates Tanger.
Our financial strategy has always been conservative, with a great emphasis on maintaining sufficient liquidity to provide optimal flexibility.
In January, given the meaningful improvement of our cash flows since the onset of the pandemic, we reinstated out dividend, which is an important part of our total return for shareholders.
As previously announced on January 1, I assumed the role of Executive Chair after 12 years as CEO.
And the more than 35 years that I've been with the company, I am extremely proud of what we have accomplished as the leader in the outlet industry.
We created a brand synonymous with quality Outlet Centers, became the go-to-channel for countless world-class brands and retailers, created thousands of jobs and prioritized our role as a community leader, contributor, and partner.
I have complete confidence in Steve's ability to lead the company during this transformative time and look forward to advising Steve through this transition.
We are encouraged by the opportunities we have identified to position the company to return to sustained growth over time.
Finally, I want to extend our best wishes to those who are in the path of the current winter storms and are being so impacted by the extreme weather and power outages.
I'm grateful and excited for the opportunity to lead Tanger through this important transition, in partnership with Steve, our Board of Directors, and the entire Tanger team.
While the last 11 months' have been challenging for our company, the positive traffic, rent collections and liquidity trends that Steve mentioned are all indicators that our business is stabilizing and our shoppers are quickly returning to our open-air outlet shopping centers.
During 2020, while navigating the pa...
... related to the fourth quarter build rents.
The write-offs were offset by the reversal of approximately $3.5 million in reserves related to rents previously deferred or under negotiation as a result of better-than-expected collections, leaving a net benefit of approximately $400,000.
In addition, we recognized a $1.1 million charge to core FFO related to the write-off of straight-line rents, which are not included in Same-Center NOI.
Through the end of January, we had collected 95% of fourth quarter rents build.
We also continue to collect rents build for prior periods, including amounts related to 2020, we allowed our tenants to defer to 2021.
As of January 31, our second quarter improved to 63% of build rents from 43%.
Third quarter improved to 91% from 89% and 57% of deferred rents had been collected, nearly half of which represented prepayments.
We collected 90% of the deferred rents that were due in January.
As of January 31, 2021, collections of January rents build were similar to collection rates for the fourth quarter.
Core FFO for the quarter was positively impacted by the recognition of lease termination fees totaling $4.1 million, which was significantly elevated over the prior year amount of approximately $100,000.
As previously discussed, we have always prioritized maintaining a strong financial position and particularly through the pandemic, this discipline has proven to be critical.
With the improvements in rent collections, the ongoing focus on cost controls and a prudent approach to capital allocation, we had over $680 million of available liquidity, including over $80 million of cash and $600 million of unused capacity on our lines of credit as of the end of January.
We have no significant debt maturities until December 2023.
Given the improved rent collections and our ample liquidity position, our Board declared a dividend of $0.1775 per share, which was paid last week to holders of record on January 29.
We will continue our disciplined and conservative approach to capital allocation.
In addition to dividend distributions sufficient to maintain REIT status, our priority uses of capital include investing in our portfolio to grow NOI, reducing leverage to pre-COVID levels over time, and evaluating selective growth opportunities over the longer term.
While we are encouraged by the pace of leasing and progress of the initiatives that Steve Yalof discussed, we anticipate that there will be variability in our performance.
As the ongoing impact of the pandemic remains uncertain, we continue to anticipate pressure from current vacancies, additional potential store closures and rent modifications.
In light of this backdrop, we expect core FFO per share for 2021 to be between $1.47 and $1.57 per share.
This guidance assumes there are no further government mandated shutdowns and assumes lease termination fees decrease by $9 million to $10 million or $0.09 to $0.10 per share, from the elevated level we recognized in 2020.
Currently, we expect to recapture approximately 200,000 square feet due to bankruptcies and brandwide restructurings during 2021, most of which we expect will occur during the first half of the year.
We are not providing any further detailed operational performance assumptions at this time.
However, we do anticipate there will be some variability in quarterly operational performance on a year-over-year comparison basis.
In 2020, we did not see any meaningful impact from COVID it in the first quarter.
And in the first quarter of 2021, there have been widespread winter storms across much of our portfolio.
We expect a combined annual recurring capital expenditures and second generation tenant allowances of approximately $40 million to $45 million for 2021.
Finally, we believe our balance sheet is well positioned from a liquidity perspective.
We are continuing to take the appropriate steps to navigate the current environment and maximize our financial flexibility.
Operator, can we take our first question.
