Today's call is being hosted from Houston, following the Schlumberger Limited board meeting held earlier this week.
Joining us on the call are Olivier Le Peuch, chief executive officer; and Stephane Biguet, chief financial officer.
These matters involve risks and uncertainties that could cause our results to differ materially from those projected in these statements.
I therefore, refer you to our latest 10-K filing and our other SEC filings.
Our comments today may also include non-GAAP financial measures.
Thereafter, I will follow with our view of the 2022 outlook and some insights into our near-term financial ambitions.
The fourth quarter was characterized by broad-based activity growth.
With continued momentum in North America, activity acceleration in the international markets and an accretive offshore market contribution, upon which we delivered strong sequential revenue growth, our sixth consecutive quarter of margin expansion and outstanding double-digit free cash flow generation.
These financial results conclude an exceptional year of financial performance for Schlumberger, at a pivotal time for the company and in our industry at large.
Underlying these results are the following highlights from the quarter.
Geographically, sequential growth in North America exceeded rig activity, growing in excess of 20% offshore and international revenue growth accelerated, closing the second half of 2021, up 12% versus the prior year.
All international areas posted growth, driven by gains in more than 75% of our international business units.
By division, revenue in all four divisions grew sequentially and when compared to the same period last year.
Digital Integration led growth, posting double-digit sequential growth and record-high margins.
well construction and reservoir performance, our predominantly service-oriented Divisions, outperformed expectations with strong sequential growth and approximately 30% growth year over year on a pro forma basis.
production systems recorded year-end sales, which drove mid-single-digit growth, though partially impacted by logistics challenge.
Operating margins expanded in spite of seasonality effects, improving further beyond prepandemic levels.
And finally, we generated outstanding cash flow from operation exceeding $1.9 billion in the quarter.
All in all, I am very pleased with our operational execution, our safety performance and our financial results through the fourth quarter.
Now, let me briefly reflect on what we achieved in 2021.
In our core, we fully operationalized our returns-focused strategy, leveraging our new division and basin organization to seize the start of the upcycle.
In North America, this resulted in full year topline revenue growth, excluding the effects of divestures and significantly expanded margins achieving double digits, one of the financial targets we laid out in 2019.
Internationally, we also grew the topline and expanded margins significantly, as international activity strengthened in the second half of the year.
This also resulted in full year international margins that exceeded 2019 levels.
Taken together, these margins resulted in the highest global operating margins of the last six years, setting an excellent foundation for further expansion, as activity accelerates and market conditions further support pricing improvement.
In Digital, our second engine of growth, I am very proud of the momentum we established during the year.
We advanced on our goals to expand market access and accelerate adoption of our platform, AI capabilities and powerful digital tools to reduce cycle time, improve performance and lower carbon intensity.
We built partnerships to achieve comprehensive cloud access globally, collaborated with AI innovators to deploy machine-learning and AI solutions and enabled digital operations through the automation of key workflows in well construction and production operations.
At the end of 2021, we have more than 240 commercial DELFI customers, record...
...ially to $1.3 billion.
This growth was primarily due to higher intervention and stimulation activity in the international offshore markets.
Margins were essentially flat at 15.5% as a result of seasonality effects and technology mix, largely driven by the end of summer exploration campaigns in the Northern Hemisphere.
Well construction revenue of $2.4 billion increased 5% sequentially due to higher land and offshore drilling, both in North America and internationally.
Margins of 15.4% were essentially flat sequentially as the favorable combination of increased activity and pricing gains was offset by seasonal effects.
Finally, production systems revenue of $1.8 billion was up 5% sequentially, largely from new offshore projects and year-end sales.
However, margins decreased 85 basis points to 9%, largely as a result of the impact of delayed deliveries due to global supply and logistic constraints.
Now, turning to our liquidity.
Our cash flow generation during the fourth quarter was outstanding.
We delivered $1.9 billion of cash flow from operations and free cash flow of $1.3 billion during the quarter.
This was the result of a very strong working capital performance driven by exceptional cash collections and customer advances.
Cash flows were further enhanced by the sale of a portion of our shares in Liberty, generating net proceeds of $109 million during the quarter.
Following this transaction, we hold a 31% interest in Liberty.
On a full year basis, we generated $4.7 billion of cash flow from operations and $3 billion of free cash flow.
We generated more free cash in 2021 than in 2019, despite our revenue being 30% lower.
This is largely attributable to our efforts of the last two years relating to the implementation of our capital stewardship program and the high grading of our portfolio.
As a result of all of this, we ended the year with net debt of $11.1 billion.
This represents an improvement of $2.8 billion compared to the end of 2020.
We are proud to say that net debt is now at its lowest level of the last five years.
During the year, we also continued to reduce gross debt by repaying $1 billion dollars of notes that were coming due in May of this year.
In total, our gross debt reduced by $2.7 billion in the last twelve months thereby significantly increasing our financial flexibility.
Now, looking ahead to 2022.
We expect total capital investments, consisting of capex and investments in APS and exploration data, to be approximately $1.9 to $2 billion dollars, as compared to just under $1.7 billion in 2021.
This increase will allow us to fully seize the multiyear growth opportunity ahead of us, while still achieving our double-digit free cash flow margin objective.
We are entering this growth cycle with a business that is much less capital-intensive as compared to previous cycles.
As a reminder, during the last growth cycle of 2009 to 2014 our total capital investment as a percentage of revenue was approximately 12%.
We are, therefore, well positioned to fully reap the benefits of this growth cycle with the potential for enhanced free cash flow margins and return on capital employed.
With this backdrop, I would like to emphasize that based on the industry fundamentals and positioning of the Company that Olivier highlighted earlier, our financial outlook for 2022 is very strong.
We have high expectations and in 2022, we expect a triple double consisting of double-digit return on capital employed, double-digit return on sales and double-digit free cash flow margin.
It is worth noting that we have not experienced this combination in a single year since 2015.
Finally, I am pleased to announce that we will hold a Capital Markets Day in the second half of the year.
This event will allow us the opportunity to provide you with additional details relating to Schlumberger's strategy and financial objectives.
Further information regarding this event will be forthcoming shortly.
I will now turn the conference call back to Olivier.
