I'm Steve Rolfs, Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of Sensient Technologies Corporation.
During our call today, we will reference certain non-GAAP financial measures, which we believe provide investors with additional information to evaluate the Company's performance and improve the comparability of results between reporting periods.
These non-GAAP financial results should not be considered in isolation from or as a substitute for financial information calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Our actual results may differ materially, particularly in view of the uncertainties created by the COVID-19 pandemic, governmental attempts at remedial action and the timing of a return of more normal economic activity.
We urge you to read Sensient's filings, including our 10-K, our second quarter 10-Q and our forthcoming third quarter 10-Q for a description of additional factors that could potentially impact our financial results.
Please bear these factors in mind when you analyze our comments today.
Due to changes we have made to our portfolio and the divestitures we announced last year, we are updating our group and product lines.
The most notable change is that our flavors and fragrances segment will now be named the flavors and extracts segment.
You will also notice some small changes to the names we use for some of our product lines.
Sensient's focused portfolio strengthens our ability to service the food, pharmaceutical and personal care markets.
We will continue to report the three divested product lines of fragrances, yogurt fruit preparations and inks as long as these product lines impact our comparisons.
Now we'll hear from Paul.
And I'm pleased to report that results were in line with our expectations and our overall guidance for the year.
I'm very pleased with the continued revenue and profit growth in our flavors and extract group as well as our food and pharmaceutical business in the color group.
Our Asia Pacific group also posted solid profit growth in the quarter.
Overall, each of our groups performed well despite the adverse impact of COVID-19.
COVID-19 continues to be a net negative to the Company.
The market decline in the makeup industry continues to impact the color group's personal care business.
And on a geographic basis, we continue to see headwinds in Asia Pacific, Europe and Latin America.
In the midst of this pandemic, we have ensured our employees are safe and healthy, our facilities remain open, our supply chain remains strong and we have delivered our products on time to our customers.
Based on current trends, I expect that we will deliver on our earnings per share outlook for the year as the foundation of our business remains strong.
Our focus over the years on customer service, on-time delivery and sales execution has led to a high level of revenue from new product wins during the second half of 2019 and the first half of this year.
Furthermore, as the pandemic continues and new product development at certain companies has slowed, we have focused on regaining lost business and gaining share at our customers.
This focus, coupled with lower overall sales attrition, is paying off in our results and should continue to benefit future periods.
Last year at this time, we announced three divestitures.
In the second quarter, we completed the sale of inks.
And I'm pleased to say that we completed the sale of the yogurt fruit prep business during the third quarter.
This is our second completed divestiture in 2020, and I am optimistic that we will complete the divestiture of fragrances in the near future.
As I mentioned last year, the divestiture of these three businesses allows us to focus on our key customer markets, food, pharmaceutical and personal care.
I'm very pleased with the progress of our flavors and extracts group this year.
The group had an impressive quarter with adjusted local currency revenue growth of 13% and profit growth of 24%.
This is the third straight quarter of revenue growth, which ...
...onsolidated adjusted revenue was $300 million, an increase of approximately 6.1% in local currency compared to the third quarter of 2019.
This revenue growth was primarily a result of the flavors and extracts group, which was up approximately 13% in local currency.
Consolidated adjusted operating income increased 10.1% in local currency to $41.5 million in the third quarter of 2020.
This growth was led by the flavors and extracts group, which increased operating income by 24.1% in local currency.
The Asia Pacific group also had a nice growth in operating income in the quarter, up 15.5% in local currency.
And operating income in the food and pharmaceutical business in the color group was up over 20% in local currency.
The increase in operating income in these businesses is a result of the volume growth Paul explained earlier combined with the overall lower cost structure across the Company.
Our adjusted diluted earnings per share was $0.77 in this year's third quarter compared to $0.74 in last year's third quarter.
As Paul mentioned, the overall impact of COVID on the Company's results has been a headwind.
The impact on our food and pharmaceutical businesses is mixed, but as we have discussed, the negative impact in our personal care business is significant.
We have reduced debt by approximately $60 million since the beginning of the year.
We have adequate liquidity to meet operating and financial needs through our cash flow and available credit lines.
Our debt-to-EBITDA is 2.6, down from 2.9 at the start of the year.
Cash flow from operations was $143 million for the first nine months of 2020, an increase of 12% compared to prior year.
Capital expenditures were $34 million in the first nine months of 2020 compared to $26.1 million in the first nine months of 2019.
Our free cash flow increased 7% to $109 million for the first nine months of this year.
Consistent with what we communicated during our last call, we expect our adjusted consolidated operating income and earnings may be flat to lower in 2020 because of the level of non-cash performance-based equity expense in 2020.
We also expected a higher tax rate in 2020 compared to our 2019 rate, which was lower as a result of a number of planning opportunities.
Based on current trends, we are reconfirming our previously issued full-year GAAP earnings per share guidance of $2.10 per share to $2.35 per share.
The full-year guidance also now includes approximately $0.05 of currency headwinds based on current exchange rates.
We are also reconfirming our previously issued full-year adjusted earnings per share guidance of $2.60 to $2.80, which excludes divestiture-related costs, operational improvement plan costs, the impact of the divested or to-be-divested businesses and foreign currency impacts.
The Company expects foreign currency impacts to be minimal in the fourth quarter.
We are also maintaining our adjusted EBITDA guidance of low-to-mid single-digit growth.
In conclusion, we continue to expect long-term revenue growth rates of mid-single digits in each of our groups.
Our stock-based compensation and other incentive costs have reset this year.
Going forward, this should be less of a headwind for us.
We do expect our tax rate to trend up slightly in future years under current law.
As a result, we believe adjusted EBITDA is a better measure of the Company's operating performance, and expect this metric to grow at a mid-single digit rate or better.
In terms of our capital allocation priorities, we will continue to pay down debt in the near term.
We also continue to evaluate acquisition opportunities.
Absent an acquisition, we have the ability to buy back shares.
We expect our capital expenditures to be in a range of $50 million to $60 million annually.
Our divestiture activity and our operational improvement plan allows us to focus on our key customer markets of food, pharmaceutical excipients and personal care, while providing the foundation for future revenue and margin growth.
