I'm joined by John Garrison, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer; and John Duffy Sheehan, Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer.
In addition, we will be discussing non-GAAP information that we believe is useful in evaluating the company's operating performance.
Reconciliations for these non-GAAP measures can be found in the conference call materials.
I will take a moment and emphasize once again the Terex' actions are always guided by our values.
We consistently act with integrity, operate with excellence and care for our team members, customers and communities.
That is true every quarter, but it has been especially important in the past 18 months as the world have dealt with the unprecedented challenges brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic.
While risks remain many of the world's economies are moving forward.
Safety remains the top priority in the Company, driven by Think Safe, Work Safe, Home Safe.
All Terex team members have contributed to our effort to continue to produce and service equivalent for our customers, while following the protocols and maintaining a safe working environment.
I would like to offer my gratitude to our team members and distributors that worked through so many unique circumstances over the last year.
We owe our results to the incredible efforts of our operations and parts team members, who kept our facilities running.
Our sales and service team members, along with our distributors have also gone above and beyond to meet the needs of our customers.
Finally, we are proud to be a values based company with process leadership in environmental, social and governance practices.
This past quarter we spend time speaking to some of our investors regarding ESG.
If you'd like to learn more about our initiatives, please see our Investor Relations website.
Now let me recap some of our results, which Duffy will describe in greater detail.
We continue to deliver positive results as the customer demand remained strong during the quarter.
While revenues were below our expectations, due to supply chain challenges, limited production output, we increased operating margins and bookings in both AWP and MP dramatically year-over-year.
We significantly improved our second quarter earnings per share, compared to last year and we are increasing our earnings and free cash flow outlook for full year 2021.
AWP and MP continue to effectively manage supply chain disruptions.
As a result of the strong execution in both segments, second quarter 2021, operating margins, improved dramatically to 11.8% for the company, with both segments, delivering double-digit operating margins.
This represents a 170 basis point adjusted operating margin improvement on revenues, 20% lower than the second quarter of 2019.
Our intense focus on networking capital management and improved profitability drove $101 million of positive free cash flow in the quarter.
And more than $140 million of free cash flow year-to-date.
During the second quarter, our team continued to respond to increased customer demand.
Effectively manage supply chain and logistics disruptions, tightly managed all cost and delivered improved margins, and outstanding positive free cash flow.
Our financial results demonstrate that our strategic priorities are working to improve the Company and deliver positive financial results for shareholders.
We delivered strong financial results as our strategic, operational priorities, of execute, innovate and grow, continue to make excellent progress.
First we continue to improve Terex' global cost competitiveness.
We expect our SG&A as a percentage of sales to be below our target of 12.5% for the full year 2021.
We are maintaining strict cost discipline while recognizing that growth in the business will necessitate investment spending.
In the first quarter, we announced the planned move of our Oklahoma City Telehandler production to Monterrey, Mexico.
This action is on track and will reduce the cost of manufacturing of Telehandler prod...
...sing levels of AWPs customer fleet replenishment.
Our full year revenue outlook is limited though as a result of the availability of components from our supply chain.
From a quarterly perspective, we now expect revenues for the full year to be slightly higher in the second half than the first half of the year with the third quarter being the strongest of the year.
We continue to expect both our operating profits, and margins to increase each quarter year-over-year in 2021.
However, as a result of commodity cost increases, outpacing, customer price increases, the absolute amount of operating profit in the second half of 2021 is expected to be lower than the actual operating profit achieved in the first half 2021.
We continue to plan for total company incremental margins for the full year 2021, which meet or exceed our 25% target.
As a result of positive first half callouts, corporate and other costs are expected to be slightly higher in the second half versus the first half of the year, including $0.26 per share of cost for refinancing of our capital structure and the other callouts in Q2.
Our full year earnings per share outlook is increased to $2.85 to $3.05 per share based on sales of approximately $3.9 billion.
Quarterly earnings per share are expected to be generally consistent with the development of operating profits during the year.
For the full year 2021, we are estimating free cash flow of approximately $200 million, reflecting a strong year on positive cash generation.
Full year free cash flow includes approximately $75 million from income and VAT tax refunds, which are not expected to reoccur.
During the first half of 2021, we received approximately $35 million of these refunds.
We continue to plan for capital expenditures, net of asset disposition of approximately $90 million.
The largest project, including capital expenditures is for the Genie Mexico manufacturing facility.
Turning to Slide 11.
I will now summarize our updated 2021 earnings per share outlook.
We expect the strong customer sentiments demonstrated in Q2 by our AWP and MP customers to continue throughout 2021.
Our 2021 full-year earnings per share outlook reflects first, our outperformance over the first half of the year.
Second, the operating profit contribution on additional revenue for Q3 and Q4.
And third, net cost pressures from material cost headwinds.
Overall, our 2021 outlook represents a significant improvement in operating performance when compared to 2020.
We will continue to aggressively manage costs while positioning our businesses for growth.
Turning to Slide 12.
And I will review our disciplined capital allocation strategy.
Our team members remain vigilant and will continue to efficiently manage production and scrutinize every expenditure.
The strong, positive free cash flow of $101 million in the quarter demonstrates the focus and discipline our team members continue to demonstrate to tightly manage net working capital.
Terex has ample of liquidity.
We have over $1.1 billion available to us with no near-term debt maturities, so we can manage and grow the business.
Our strong liquidity position and cash generation allowed us to prepay $83 million of term loans during Q2, which is in addition to the $196 million of term loans prepaid in early February.
In addition, we continue to pay our quarterly dividend.
We are committed to strengthen Terex's balance sheet while maintaining flexibility to execute on our organic and inorganic growth plan.
Turning to Slide 13, to wrap up our remarks.
Terex team members around the world are focused on the right things, Safety, health, customers and improved productivity.
End markets are strong and the team is managing supply chain headwinds.
We are driving positive free cash flow, we are continuing to invest in innovative products to meet increased customer demand.
We are focused on both organic and inorganic growth.
As a result of these actions, Terex is well positioned to deliver strong 2021 results.
