I'm joined by John Garrison, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer; and John Duffy Sheehan, Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer.
In addition, we will be discussing non-GAAP information that we believe is useful in evaluating the company's operating performance.
Reconciliations for these non-GAAP measures can be found in the conference call materials.
Most importantly, I hope you and your families are remaining safe and healthy.
Throughout these challenging times, we are proud of all Terex team members who are keeping themselves and others safe, meeting the needs of customers and helping our communities.
Safety remains a top priority in the company, driven by Think Safe, Work Safe, Home Safe.
All Terex team members have contributed to our effort to continue to produce for our customers, while following the protocols and maintaining a safe working environment.
Before I discuss our Q1 results, I would like to review our commitment to ESG.
Environment, social and governance is not a new concept at Terex.
It has been front and center for many years through our Zero Harm safety program and our commitment to maintaining a vibrant and supportive working environment.
ESG is foundational to the Terex culture.
Our company purpose is to help improve people's lives.
Through our Terex Way Values, we are focused on strong governance, a commitment to diversity, equity, and inclusion at every level and supporting the communities where we live and work, including being responsible, environmental stewards.
First, strong governance and leadership.
Our independent and engaged board with diverse backgrounds, perspectives and experience adds value for all stakeholders.
Second, we've enhanced our DE&I governance and we are energized by the engagement of our team members.
And third, electrification, by interview using sustainable products, such as our new Genie electric drive scissors.
We've made good progress in our sustainability program, including publishing our first annual ESG report, which enhances our ESG communications.
We're working on standard reporting frameworks, which a group of company senior leaders are charged with implementing.
We will keep stakeholders apprised through our investor conferences and quarterly earnings calls.
We believe companies that recognize the importance of ESG are better able to identify strategic opportunities and meet competitive challenges.
Turning to slide five.
We're off to a very strong start to 2021.
Customer demand continued to increase during the quarter, resulting in revenues exceeding our expectations.
We increased operating margins and backlog in AWP and MP year-over-year.
We significantly improved our first quarter earnings per share compared to last year, and we are increasing our full year sales, operating profit, cash flow and earnings per share outlook.
Despite having to address supply chain challenges, AWP delivered improved margins in Q1.
Materials process continued its strong execution by overcoming supply disruptions and delivering increased sales and profitability.
As a result of the improved execution in both segments, year-over-year operating margins of the company improved by 800 basis points.
Our intense focus on net working capital management and improved profitability drove $40 million of positive free cash flow in the quarter, which is an excellent start to the year.
During the first quarter, our team continued to meet increased customer demand, tightly managed all costs and delivered outstanding positive free cash flow.
Overall, our Q1 financial performance demonstrated strong execution by our global team in the face of increasing supply chain challenges.
We continue to improve Terex's global cost competitiveness.
Our SG&A cost reduction initiative, with a target of full year 2021 of approximately 12.5% or better SG&A to sales remains on track.
We are maintaining strict cost discipline.
In addition, during the quarter, we announced the plan move of our Oklahoma City Teleh...
...for incremental margins, which meet or exceed our 25% target for the full year 2021.
Corporate and other costs will occur relatively evenly throughout the remainder of the year.
On April 1st, we completed the refinancing of our revolving credit facility and unsecured bond.
These transactions will result in Q2 charges of $25 million, which were not previously included in our 2021 financial outlook.
Including $0.30 per share of costs for refinancing of our capital structure, our earnings per share outlook is increased to $2.35 to $2.55 per share, based on sales of approximately $3.7 billion.
Quarterly earnings per share are expected to be generally consistent with the development of operating profits during the year.
For the full year 2021, we are estimating free cash flow of approximately $150 million, reflecting another year of positive cash generation.
We continue to plan for capital expenditures, net of asset dispositions of approximately $90 million.
The largest project included in capital expenditures is for the Genie Mexico manufacturing facility John referenced earlier.
Turning to slide 12, and I'll summarize our updated 2021 earnings per share outlook.
We expect the strong customer sentiment demonstrated in Q1 by our AWP and MP customers to continue throughout 2021.
Our 2021 full year earnings per share outlook comprehends, first, our Q1 outperformance.
Second, the operating profit contribution on additional revenue for Q2 through Q4.
Third, price and manufacturing efficiency, which is only partially offsetting increasing supply chain headwinds.
And finally, reduced interest expense and one-time capital structure charges of approximately $27 million, representing $0.30 per share.
Overall, our 2021 outlook represents a significant improvement in operating performance when compared to 2020.
We will continue to aggressively manage costs, while positioning the business for growth.
Turning to page 13, and I'll review our disciplined capital allocation strategy.
Our team members remain vigilant and will continue to aggressively manage production, especially within our AWP segment and scrutinize every expenditure.
The strong positive free cash flow of $40 million in the quarter demonstrates the hard work of our team members to tightly manage net working capital.
Terex has ample liquidity of approximately $1.2 billion available to us, with no near term debt maturities.
So, we can manage and grow the business.
As discussed during the Q1 earnings call, the proceeds from the sale of the TFS on book portfolio and our strong liquidity position allowed us to prepay $196 million of term loans in early February.
This prepayment resulted in reducing outstanding debt, lowering, leverage, and saving annual cash interest expense of approximately $7 million.
This deleveraging action resulted in a rating agency upgrading Terex's outlook and providing positive momentum for refinancing our capital structure.
Our refinancing included successfully renewing our $600 million revolving credit facility and placing 600 million of new bonds with a 5% coupon.
These new bonds replaced our 5.625% bonds due to mature in 2025 and reduce annual cash interest expense by approximately $4 million.
Importantly, Terex obtained lower costs, unsecured funding for the remainder of this decade.
This strong action demonstrates our commitment to improving Terex balance sheet, while maintaining flexibility to execute on our organic and inorganic growth plans.
Turning to slide 14, to wrap up our remarks.
Terex team members around the world are focused on the right things, safety, health, customers, and improve productivity.
End markets are strong, and the team is managing the increasing supply chain headwinds.
We're driving positive free cash flow.
We're continuing to invest in innovative products to meet increased customer demand.
We are focused on both organic and inorganic growth.
As a result of these actions, Terex is well-positioned to deliver strong 2021 results.
