With me here, I have Scott Barbour, our President and CEO; and Scott Cottrill, our CFO.
A copy of the release has also been included in an 8-K submitted to the SEC.
We delivered another quarter of record financial performance in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021.
Sales grew 20% year-over-year, driven by 21% residential sales growth and 11% non-residential sales growth as we continued to execute at both ADS and Infiltrator in a favorable demand environment.
The residential market remains strong.
Both ADS and Infiltrator residential market sales grew over 20% in the fourth quarter, driven by favorable dynamics in new home construction, repair/remodel and on-site septic, accelerated by our material conversion strategies at both businesses.
Residential market sales have increased to 39% of our domestic sales as compared to 23% prior to the Infiltrator acquisition.
The market indicators show that homebuilders continue to acquire land for future development and that there is an overall shortage in available homes, which drives the front-end new community development sales of ADS, and the on-site septic system sales of Infiltrator are driven during the home completion stage.
In addition, the repair/remodel business remains robust.
ADS participates in the repair/remodel segment of the residential market through retail, which is about 40% of the legacy business' residential sales.
Infiltrator's repair/remodel business in the residential on-site septic market accounts for roughly one-third of their business.
Growth in our non-residential end market was broad based throughout the United States.
We continue to benefit from growth in horizontal construction, such as warehouses, distribution centers, data centers, as well as the developments that follow the residential buildout.
About two-thirds of our domestic allied product sales are in the non-residential markets, where sales increased 13% further, giving us confidence in the underlying market strength.
Sales in the agriculture market increased 50% this quarter, driven by strong demand as the spring selling season got off to a good start.
The agriculture economy remains favorable and we continue to benefit from the programs we put in place around organizational changes, new product introductions and improving execution.
We experienced strong demand in the Midwest region, particularly in Minnesota, Ohio, Iowa and Michigan.
Further, we are expanding our presence in key strategic areas like Missouri and parts of the Southeast to drive increased market share.
International sales also increased 49%, primarily driven by sales growth in our Canadian business which nearly doubled compared to last year.
Canada is doing well across both the construction and agriculture end markets, with similar trends to the United States.
Additionally, this quarter, we continued to leverage our pipe manufacturing facilities in Mexico to help service the strong demand we experienced in the United States.
Finally, Infiltrator continues to exceed expectations with 23% sales growth in the fourth quarter against a very tough comparison to the prior year and broad-based growth across the Infiltrator product portfolio.
This includes double-digit growth in tanks and leachfield products, with strong growth in Florida, Tennessee, Alabama and Indiana, among other states.
This was led by our material conversion strategy of displacing concrete septic tanks with plastic tanks, and the economic advantages of septic chambers in leachfield systems.
The Infiltrator business is benefiting from strong distribution presence in the Southeast and Midwest, as well as rapidly growing micropolitan areas which typically lack the sewer infrastructure needed to support rapid housing development.
We achieved record fourth quarter adjusted EBITDA during the period.
Adjusted EBITDA margin increased 190 basis points.
The increase in profitability in both businesses was driven by leverage from the strong sales growth, favorable pricing as well as...
...es, down from 21% of sales last year.
Further, our trailing 12-month leverage ratio is now 1.1 times.
We ended the quarter in a favorable -- very favorable liquidity position with $195 million of cash and $339 million available under our revolving credit facility, bringing our total liquidity to $534 million.
And finally, on Slide 10, we have our fiscal 2022 guidance.
Based on our performance to date, order activity, backlog and current market trends, we currently expect net sales to be in the range of $2.220 billion to $2.300 billion, representing growth of 12% to 16% over this past year, and adjusted EBITDA to be in the range of $635 million to $665 million, representing growth of 12% to 17% over this past year.
As we look to[Phonetic] fiscal 2022, we are confident in the demand environment across our end markets.
Our residential end-market growth is also expected to remain strong, particularly in those key southern crescent states we are focused on, including Florida and Texas.
In addition, our agricultural market remains robust with strength in crop pricing, driving investments in land productivity through better field drainage.
And finally, the international outlook is turning more favorable driven by our business in Canada, which is our largest international market.
Lastly, the exports business is expected to rebound as COVID-19 restrictions continue to ease.
This strong demand outlook gives us confidence in our revenue guidance.
We have also executed several price increases since our third quarter call across all of our end markets at both ADS and Infiltrator.
To date, our pricing actions are flowing through and we will continue to closely monitor the situation to ensure we stay ahead of inflationary cost pressures.
On the cost side, we are seeing inflationary pressure in materials, labor and transportation, as well as some issues with labor availability.
Within transportation, the third-party market availability is tight and there is inflationary cost pressure on diesel, wages and common carrier rates.
In this type of inflationary cost environment, we are also able to control our transportation cost better than most due to our large internal fleet, and we are working to leverage such to offset the rising cost we are seeing through payload efficiency, route planning and other programs to more efficiently serve our customers.
While we expect EBITDA margins to be flat to slightly up this year, it is important to highlight that we expect the most pressure on our price/cost spread to occur during the first half of our fiscal year.
Bottom line, we believe our long-term growth and margin expansion ability remains intact, despite the near-term inflationary cost environment we will be dealing with this year.
Given our strong balance sheet and leverage position, strategic capital deployment remains one of our top priorities.
We will continue to execute a balanced and disciplined capital deployment strategy, focusing on organic investments as our highest-return, lowest-risk option.
In fiscal 2022, we plan to spend between $130 million and $150 million on capital expenditures to support growth, recycling, innovation, productivity, and safety initiatives at both ADS and Infiltrator, basically doubling our commitment to capex year-over-year.
In addition to organic investments, we continue to actively explore M&A opportunities that are aligned with our strategic vision.
We are extremely excited about the M&A opportunities we are pursuing and see this as a key component of our capital deployment strategy in both the near term and longer term.
In addition to investing in the business through deploying capital organically and through M&A, we, today, announced a 22% increase in our quarterly dividend as well as a $250 million increase in our share repurchase program.
We previously had $42 million available under this program, and the increase announced today brings the total authorization to $292 million.
Operator, please open the line.
