Greenhill reported strong results for the fourth quarter and full year, with revenue of $140.7 million and $311.7 million, respectively. The firm's operating margin was 57% and 18%, and net income was $2.71 per share and $1.36 per share, respectively. The quarterly revenue was up 32%, and earnings per share was up 158% from the same period last year. For the full year, revenue was up 4%, and earnings per share was up 202% from the prior year. The firm's strong quarter was not simply a matter of transaction timing, as the earnings per share for the quarter was greater than the analyst consensus forecast for the fourth quarter and the next four quarters ahead combined. The firm benefited from particularly strong results from its European M&A business and its U.S. restructuring business, as well as an expanding array of financing advisory roles. The firm's compensation ratio for the year was 62%, moderately above the target level, but the compensation ratio for the quarter was unusually low. The firm expects increased M&A revenue in most of its international offices and in certain sectors like industrials in 2021, driven by a positive economic outlook, increased deal activity, and other factors. The firm also expects more debt restructuring to be needed for the many industries and companies adversely affected by the continuing pandemic. The firm aims to generate meaningful revenue growth in 2021 and expects to have considerable lower travel expense than historically. The firm's overarching objective is to increase the scale, diversity, and consistency of its revenue sources, while maintaining appropriate discipline on expenses. The firm plans to recruit M&A bankers who bring incremental industry sector expertise or regional capabilities and expand its restructuring advisory team. The firm also aims to enhance its focus on advising financial sponsors on a wide variety of transactions. The firm is opening its new headquarters in the newly renovated Rockefeller Center building on Sixth Avenue and has passed the 25-year mark in the life of its firm.