The company's performance was strong across all brands, particularly in direct-to-consumer channels of distribution. The team's ongoing efforts to navigate through the short-term challenges posed by the pandemic, while staying focused on the long-term strategic objective of delivering happiness to customers, resulted in excellent results. The company's brand portfolio, inventory, products, and customer service are all contributing to the delivery of superior customer experience. The company is investing heavily in further improving the customer experience, with enhancements to mobile apps, search engine optimization, customer data and insights, customer service, and much more. The boundaries between retail and e-commerce businesses are becoming increasingly blurry, and the company is determined to fulfill the desire of customers to mix and match digital and physical elements at will. The company has been able to expand its e-commerce gross margin and expects its total e-commerce business to be roughly a third of consolidated sales in 2021. While e-commerce is the fastest growing channel, physical stores remain an incredibly important part of the direct-to-consumer business. The company's business is well supported by its solid balance sheet and strong cash flow from operations. The company expects full price direct-to-consumer sales growth and consolidated gross margin expansion over 2019 in the back half of the year, despite specific headwinds such as a reduction in Lilly Pulitzer's third quarter flash clearance sale, supply chain delays, and the exit of Lanier Apparel. The company expects sales in a range of $1.085 billion to $1.105 billion for the full year, as compared to sales of $1.12 billion in 2019. The company's effective tax rate for the full year is expected to be approximately 23%. The company is investing in capital expenditures, including technology related to digital marketing, customer service, mobile enhancements, and distribution, and is also opening a new Marlin Bar at Town Square in Las Vegas. The company has a long history of returning value to shareholders through dividends, and this quarter, the Board of Directors has declared a dividend of $0.42 per share.