2021 Q1 Earnings Call Summary

Textron reported strong financial results for the first quarter of 2021, with revenues of $2.9 billion and net income of $0.75 per share. Adjusted net income on a non-GAAP measure was $0.70 per share, up from $0.35 per share in the first quarter of 2020. Segment profit in the quarter was $256 million, up from $156 million in the first quarter of 2020. Manufacturing cash flow before pension contributions totaled $71 million, up $501 million from last year's first quarter.

At Bell, revenues were up in the quarter on higher commercial revenues, partially offset by lower military revenues. The company delivered 17 helicopters up from 15 in the last year's first quarter and saw solid order activity in the quarter across multiple end markets. Bell was awarded a contract modification of $293 million for the second phase of the competitive demonstration and reduction program for FLRAA. The aircraft has demonstrated impressive performance milestones, including 305 knots of demonstrated true airspeed, level 1 handling qualities, and autonomous flight.

Textron Systems revenues were flat in the quarter while the business continued to execute well with improved operating margins. The company was awarded a contract to up to $607 million from the U.S. Army for the sustainment and modernization of existing shadow systems to the upgraded Block III configuration. Systems also delivered the first RCV medium prototype to the Army customer as they look to test these vehicles and define requirements for the future of robotic combat vehicle programs.

At ATAC, the company is continuing to ramp F1 flight hours at the operating sites related to the three awards of the U.S. Air Force CAPCAS program. At the end of the quarter, the company had 16 F1 aircraft certified for operation and deployed across its customer sites. In Aviation, revenues were eventually flat in the quarter with slightly lower volume, reflecting lower aftermarket revenues, partially offset by higher pricing. The company delivered 28 jets, up from 23 last year and 14 commercial turboprops, down from