2021 Earnings Summary

The company reported earnings of $4.07 per share, exceeding the upper end of their most recent guidance. The positive results were driven by favorable weather, solid economic recovery in the region, and continued focus on operating efficiency. The balance sheet and cash flows remain strong, allowing the company to fund a highly executable capital plan without issuing equity. The earnings were quality earnings with no adjustments. The company has set ambitious goals to reduce carbon emissions, with a plan to achieve net-zero carbon emissions from power generation by 2050. The company is also actively shaping the future of clean energy and has announced a hydrogen power pilot program. The company is driving forward on its $17.7 billion ESG progress plan, which is focused on efficiency, sustainability, and growth. The plan includes an investment in nearly 2,400 megawatts of renewable capacity over the next five years. The company expects the ESG progress plan to support average growth in its asset base of 7% a year, driving earnings growth, dividend growth, and dramatically improved environmental performance. The company saw a promising recovery throughout 2021, despite the prolonged pandemic. The latest available data show Wisconsin's unemployment rate down at 2.8%, a record low, and more than a full percentage point below the national average. Major economic development projects are moving full steam ahead, including the relocation of Grand Craft Boats, a luxury boat maker, to the Milwaukee region. The company added $0.10 year over year from utility operations, with earnings from its investment in American Transmission Company decreasing $0.02 per share year over year. The company improved on its 2020 earnings by $0.32 per share. For weather-normalized sales in Wisconsin, the company is expecting 0.5% growth this year in both its electric and natural gas businesses. The company projects first quarter 2022 earnings to be in the range of $1.68 per share to $1.70 per share, assuming normal weather for the rest of the quarter. The company is reaffirming its annual guidance of $4.29 to $4.33 per share for the full year 2022.