 2021 Q2 Earnings Call Summary

The company had another record quarter with Q2 results that exceeded guidance and supported its long-term optimism. Revenue in the second quarter was a record $453.8 million, representing year-over-year as well as sequential growth. The company's focus on driving efficiencies helped generate margins at their highest levels in over a year. Earnings per share also increased year-over-year and sequentially to a record $1.10.

The automotive program was the most significant driver of upside in the quarter, with automotive revenue growing more than 30% from the first quarter and more than doubling from a year ago. The company continued to see a recovery from traditional automotive customers and even stronger growth from new automotive programs such as LIDAR, which are beginning to contribute to its growth in a more meaningful way.

Industrial laser revenue was approximately flat and was slightly better than expected. The company expects industrial laser revenue to improve in the third quarter and is optimistic about the longer-term potential for increased outsourcing from this market.

In optical communications, the company had anticipated that continued telecom strength would offset continuing softness from datacom products that are deployed inside the data center. In fact, the company saw modest growth in optical communications revenue in the second quarter. Datacom revenue did moderate as expected, but this was more than offset by stronger telecom revenue.

The company had been anticipating that the transfer of the optical transport systems program at Cisco would be largely complete by the end of its fourth quarter and is now nearly a full quarter ahead of expectations. This faster ramp will also contribute to the anticipated growth in optical communications revenue in the third quarter.

The company is advancing its plans to expand its manufacturing footprint. It recently broke ground on a new 1 million square foot building at its campus in Chonburi, Thailand. This expansion will roughly triple the company's footprint in Chonburi and will increase its global footprint by approximately 50% to 3 million square feet, providing the company with considerable capacity to serve its anticipated growth.

The company is optimistic that Q3 will be another record-breaking quarter for the company and believes that growth from new products and programs will continue to demonstrate the success of its