 2021 Q3 Earnings Call Summary

The transcript discusses the financial performance and strategy of a company during the COVID-19 pandemic. The company's proven business model has allowed it to continue to grow and generate consistent results, with a focus on offering consumers a wide range of easily accessible brands they know and trust. The company has also been able to adapt its business continuity efforts to ensure consistent service levels in the dynamic supply environment. The company's consistent operating model and disciplined capital strategy have rewarded shareholders with solid earnings and free cash flow growth for the full fiscal year, which is expected to continue to increase capital allocation optionality. The company's diverse portfolio has enabled a stable revenue performance with strength in many brands in its portfolio, helping to offset COVID-19 impacted categories. The company has experienced strong triple-digit consumption growth in the e-commerce channel year-to-date, as consumers continue to shift to online purchasing. The company's total company gross margin of 58.2% in the first nine months was largely flat to last year's adjusted gross margin of 57.9% and has been stable across quarters. The company anticipates a gross margin of about 58% for the remainder of the year. The company's advertising and marketing came in at 15.9% of revenue in Q3 and 14.8% for the first nine months. The company still expects A&M for the full year to be just under 15% as a percent of sales as it continues at a normalized rate of spend in the fourth quarter. G&A expenses were flat in Q3 down for the first nine months of Fiscal 2021 versus the prior year, largely to disciplined cost management. The company realized strong 15% earnings per share growth for the first nine months of Fiscal 2021 versus the prior year. Lower operating costs, lower interest expense and lower share count were all factors to the growth. The company generated $43.5 million in free cash flow in Q3, which was lower than last year due to both timing of working capital and CapEx investments. The company anticipates full year 2021 free cash flow at or above prior year levels. The company has approximately $1.5 billion of net debt, which equated to a leverage ratio