 2021 Earnings Call Summary

The company's 2021 earnings exceeded the upper end of the most recent guidance, driven by favorable weather, solid economic recovery, and continued focus on operating efficiency. The balance sheet and cash flows remain strong, allowing the company to fund a highly executable capital plan without issuing equity. The earnings are quality earnings with no adjustments. The company has set aggressive goals to reduce carbon emissions and plans to achieve net-zero carbon emissions from power generation by 2050. The company is also driving forward on its $17.7 billion ESG progress plan, focused on efficiency, sustainability, and growth, with plans to invest in nearly 2,400 megawatts of renewable capacity over the next five years. The company expects to deliver among the very best risk-adjusted returns in the industry. The regional economy is showing a promising recovery, with Wisconsin's unemployment rate at a record low and major economic development projects moving full steam ahead. The company is relocating its operations from Michigan to the Milwaukee region, with J. Lo, George Clooney, and Robert Redford among its high-profile clients. The company improved on its 2020 earnings by $0.32 per share in 2021. The company's net cash provided by operating activities decreased $163 million, with an increase in cash earnings more than offset by working capital requirements. The company opportunistically refinanced over $450 million of holding company debt during the fourth quarter, reducing the average interest rate of these notes from 4.5% to 2.2%. The company's FFO to debt was 15.7% in 2021. For weather-normalized sales in Wisconsin, the company expects 0.5% growth this year in both its electric and natural gas businesses, with continued growth after a very strong year. The company projects first quarter 2022 earnings to be in the range of $1.68 per share to $1.70 per share, assuming normal weather for the rest of the quarter. The company is reaffirming its annual guidance of $4.29 to $4.33 per share for the full year 2022.